
him, he's a scoundrel. Go on! Go on!"
honorable, and brave, but if he robs his fellows there is no honor in
"It's a shame for a soldier to steal; a soldier must be honest,

screams kept repeating:
stout major was pacing up and down the line, and regardless of the
striking him regularly on his bare back. The man shrieked unnaturally. A
soldiers held him while two others were flourishing their switches and
out in front of a platoon of grenadiers before whom lay a naked man. Two
commander, higher than and different from the others, Prince Andrew came
busy with similar peaceful affairs--near the shelter of the regimental
chasseur regiment and in the lines of the Kiev grenadiers--fine fellows
at least half of them would be left on the field. After passing a
encampment, and not within sight of the enemy before an action in which
serene as if all this were happening at home awaiting peaceful
wiping them on the sleeves of their greatcoats. All their faces were as
the sergeant major with brightened expressions, licking their lips and
emptied them, rolling the vodka in their mouths, and walked away from
soldiers lifted the canteen lids to their lips with reverential faces,
a keg, filled one after another the canteen lids held out to him. The
crowded round a pockmarked, broad-shouldered sergeant major who, tilting
Another company, a lucky one for not all the companies had vodka,

before his shelter, had been tasted.
sergeant was carrying in a wooden bowl to an officer who sat on a log
the steaming boiler, waiting till the sample, which a quartermaster
In one company dinner was ready, and the soldiers were gazing eagerly at
boots or overcoats and crowding round the boilers and porridge cookers.
dressed and undressed, drying their shirts and leg bands or mending
shelters with merry chatter and laughter; around the fires sat others,
the whole place were dragging logs and brushwood and were building
the ribs and telling him to hold his hand up. Soldiers scattered over
officers were counting the men, poking the last man in each section in
greatcoats were ranged in lines, the sergeants major and company
more confident was the appearance of our troops. The soldiers in their
could be felt, but the nearer Prince Andrew came to the French lines the
miles away from the French. At Grunth also some apprehension and alarm
in the baggage train he had passed that morning on the Znaim road seven
cheerful were the troops. The greatest disorder and depression had been
The farther forward and nearer the enemy he went, the more orderly and

The staff officer remained behind and Prince Andrew rode on alone.

yourself further."
to rid himself of this staff officer's company, "please don't trouble
"Thank you very much, I will go on alone," said Prince Andrew, wishing

can see everything from there; let's go there, Prince."
point. "It's in charge of the queer fellow we saw without his boots. You
"That's our battery," said the staff officer indicating the highest

seen. Prince Andrew stopped and began examining the position.
They rode up the opposite hill. From there the French could already be

* "This is a pleasure one gets in camp, Prince."


officer.
"Voila l'agrement des camps, monsieur le Prince," * said the staff

trot to escape from the poisoned atmosphere of these latrines.
entrenchment. They had to hold their noses and put their horses to a
dozens of soldiers, continually replaced by others, who ran from the
the entrenchment, and went on again. Just behind it they came upon some
bank by unseen hands. Prince Andrew and the officer rode up, looked at
spadefuls of red clay were continually being thrown up from behind the
cold wind, swarmed in these earthworks like a host of white ants;
red. Several battalions of soldiers, in their shirt sleeves despite the
entrenchments being thrown up, the freshly dug clay of which showed up
soldiers and officers of various regiments, they saw on their left some
Having ridden beyond the village, continually meeting and overtaking

The staff officer and Prince Andrew mounted their horses and rode on.

but extremely attractive.
There was something peculiar about it, quite unsoldierly, rather comic,
Prince Andrew glanced again at the artillery officer's small figure.

his gravity.
"Kindly return to your posts," said the staff officer trying to preserve

unacceptable and had not come off. He grew confused.
a jocular tone. But before he had finished he felt that his jest was
smiling shyly in his uncomfortable position, evidently wishing to adopt
"The soldiers say it feels easier without boots," said Captain Tushin

Prince Andrew to the staff officer.
other, glanced inquiringly with his large, intelligent, kindly eyes from
Tushin, who silent and smiling, shifting from one stockinged foot to the
Prince Andrew smiled involuntarily as he looked at the artillery officer

all!" he added in a tone of command.
officer smiled.) "Kindly return to your posts, gentlemen, all of you,
and you'll be in a pretty position without your boots!" (The staff
example, yet here you are without your boots! The alarm will be sounded
"One would think that as an artillery officer you would set a good
"Well, aren't you ashamed of yourself, Captain Tushin?" he continued.

rose when they entered, smiling not altogether comfortably.
(he had given them to the canteen keeper to dry), in only his stockings,
turned to a thin, dirty little artillery officer who without his boots
gave orders that no one should leave his post. Now you, Captain," and he
once. "You know it won't do to leave your posts like this. The prince
reproachful tone of a man who has repeated the same thing more than
"Now what does this mean, gentlemen?" said the staff officer, in the

weary faces, were sitting at the table eating and drinking.
They dismounted and entered the tent. Several officers, with flushed and

"Why didn't you mention it, Prince? I would have offered you something."

Prince Andrew who had not yet had time to eat anything.
"Yes, let's go in and I will get myself a roll and some cheese," said

there, Prince, and scare them a bit. It won't take a moment."
morning I turned them all out and now look, it's full again. I must go
there," he pointed to a sutler's tent, "they crowd in and sit. This
pointing to the soldiers. "The officers don't keep them in hand. And
"There now, Prince! We can't stop those fellows," said the staff officer

and fencing from the village.
seemed to be seeking something, and soldiers dragging doors, benches,
On all sides they saw rain-soaked officers with dejected faces who

he spoke it badly, offered to conduct Prince Andrew.
diamond ring on his forefinger, who was fond of speaking French though
order. The officer on duty, a handsome, elegantly dressed man with a
forces, so as to know his bearings should he be sent to execute an
permission to ride round the position to see the disposition of the
thought Bagration. Prince Andrew, without replying, asked the prince's
stay with me, let him... he'll be of use here if he's a brave officer,"
he can get his reward just as well in the rearguard, but if he wishes to
"If he is one of the ordinary little staff dandies sent to earn a medal

if to reassure Prince Andrew.
"However, there will hardly be an engagement today," said Bagration as

important."
rearguard and have an eye on the order of retreat, "which is also very
him full liberty to remain with him during the battle or to join the
there would probably be an engagement that day or the next, and giving
with distinction and special marks of favor, explaining to him that
knowing Bolkonski to be a favorite and trusted adjutant, received him
but also disbelieved in the nearness of an engagement. Bagration,
peace but did not believe in its possibility; others talked of a battle
no one knew anything of the general position of affairs. They talked of
detachment and the battle had not yet begun. In Bagration's detachment
himself to Bagration. Bonaparte's adjutant had not yet reached Murat's
persisted in his request to Kutuzov, arrived at Grunth and reported
Between three and four o'clock in the afternoon Prince Andrew, who had

CHAPTER XV




for him.
for three days, and not one of them knew or imagined what was in store
dried and warmed themselves, cooked their porridge for the first time
escape, and Bagration's four thousand men merrily lighted campfires,
the Guards to the field of battle, afraid of letting a ready victim
Murat. Bonaparte himself, not trusting to his generals, moved with all
Bonaparte's adjutant rode full gallop with this menacing letter to

NAPOLEON

letting yourself be tricked by an aide-de-camp of the Emperor.
themselves be tricked at the crossing of the Vienna bridge, you are
when they have no powers; this one had none.... The Austrians let
The Russian Emperor's aide-de-camp is an impostor. Officers are nothing

army.... You are in a position to seize its baggage and artillery.
ratify it; but it is only a trick. March on, destroy the Russian
If, however, the Emperor of Russia ratifies that convention, I will

one but the Emperor of Russia has that right.
general who signed that capitulation had no right to do so, and that no
armistice immediately and march on the enemy. Inform him that the
order. You are causing me to lose the fruits of a campaign. Break the
my advance guard, and have no right to arrange an armistice without my
I cannot find words to express to you my displeasure. You command only

To PRINCE MURAT,

at eight o'clock in the morning

Schonbrunn, 25th Brumaire, 1805,

Murat:
capitulation, he detected a ruse and wrote the following letter to
Hollabrunn) received Murat's dispatch with the proposal of a truce and a
As soon as Bonaparte (who was at Schonbrunn, sixteen miles from
also that Murat's mistake would very soon be discovered, proved correct.
no way binding) might give time for part of the transport to pass, and
Kutuzov's expectations that the proposals of capitulation (which were in

stationary in face of an enemy eight times as strong as itself.
this movement of the transport and of the whole army, had to remain
road. Bagration's exhausted and hungry detachment, which alone covered
movements of the baggage trains of the entire army along the Krems-Znaim
meanwhile Kutuzov sent his adjutants back to hasten to the utmost the
agree to the truce but also to offer terms of capitulation, and
attendance on him, to the enemy camp. Wintzingerode was not merely to
immediately dispatched Adjutant General Wintzingerode, who was in
unexpected, chance of saving the army. On receiving the news he
stage nearer Znaim. The offer of a truce gave the only, and a quite
(whose movements were concealed from the French) advance if but one
exhausted troops some rest, and letting the transport and heavy convoys
A truce was Kutuzov's sole chance of gaining time, giving Bagration's

Kutuzov to report the offer he had received.
authorized either to accept or refuse a truce and sent his adjutant to
Russian army the three days' truce. Bagration replied that he was not
to the Russian line to announce the peace negotiations and to offer the
and retired, leaving Bagration's division exposed. Another emissary rode
Austrian general occupying the advanced posts, believed Murat's emissary
offered this truce to avoid unnecessary bloodshed. Count Nostitz, the
negotiations for peace were already proceeding, and that he therefore
armies should remain in position without moving. Murat declared that
with this object offered a three days' truce on condition that both
arrival of the rest of the troops who were on their way from Vienna, and
Kutuzov's whole army. To be able to crush it absolutely he awaited the
Bagration's weak detachment on the Znaim road he supposed it to be
fight led Murat to try to deceive Kutuzov in a similar way. Meeting
that had placed the Vienna bridge in the hands of the French without a
freak of fate made the impossible possible. The success of the trick
that came upon him at Hollabrunn, which was clearly impossible. But a
hungry, exhausted men would have to detain for days the whole enemy army
before he could reach Znaim. Hence Bagration with his four thousand
Vienna. Kutuzov with his transport had still to march for some days
few hours ahead of the French who were approaching Hollabrunn from
by the way, Bagration came out on the Vienna-Znaim road at Hollabrunn a
hungry, ill-shod soldiers, and losing a third of his men as stragglers
Marching thirty miles that stormy night across roadless hills, with his

Kutuzov himself with all his transport took the road to Znaim.
forestalling the French he was to delay them as long as possible.
and to halt facing Vienna with Znaim to his rear, and if he succeeded in
the Vienna-Znaim road. Bagration was to make this march without resting,
thousand strong, to the right across the hills from the Krems-Znaim to
The night he received the news, Kutuzov sent Bagration's vanguard, four

Russians from Krems to Znaim.
from Vienna to Znaim was shorter and better than the road for the
the French with his whole army was impossible. The road for the French
disgrace such as that of Ulm, or to utter destruction. But to forestall
forestall him at Znaim meant the exposure of his whole army to a
there would be great hope of saving the army; to let the French
on the line of Kutuzov's retreat. If he reached Znaim before the French,
advancing by forced marches toward Znaim, which lay sixty-six miles off
The French, the spy reported, having crossed the Vienna bridge, were

Kutuzov chose this latter course.

times as strong, who would hem him in from two sides.
transport, having to accept battle on the march against an enemy three
had crossed the Vienna bridge, and encumbered by his baggage and
from Russia, he risked being forestalled on that road by the French who
along the road from Krems to Olmutz, to unite with the troops arriving
all hope of a junction with Buxhowden. If Kutuzov decided to retreat
defending himself against superior forces of the enemy and abandoning
have to march with no road into unknown parts of the Bohemian mountains,
the road connecting him with the troops arriving from Russia, he would
himself in the position of Mack at Ulm. If Kutuzov decided to abandon
and surround his exhausted army of forty thousand, and he would find
army of one hundred and fifty thousand men would cut him off completely
arriving from Russia. If Kutuzov decided to remain at Krems, Napoleon's
force upon Kutuzov's line of communication with the troops that were
French, after crossing the bridge at Vienna, were advancing in immense
commanded was in an almost hopeless position. The spy reported that the
On November 1 Kutuzov had received, through a spy, news that the army he

CHAPTER XIV




affair, and about some ladies they both knew.
Emperor, about the remarks he had heard at court concerning the Krems
questioned Prince Andrew about the details of his interview with the
was not a trace of agitation on his face. With delicate irony he
on the soft springs of the carriage, he turned to Prince Andrew. There
saying, and sat plunged in thought. Five minutes later, gently swaying
Kutuzov did not reply. He seemed to have forgotten what he had been

"That is why I beg to be sent to that detachment," he said.

thought Bolkonski.
socket. "Yes, he has a right to speak so calmly of those men's death,"
temple, where an Ismail bullet had pierced his skull, and the empty eye
involuntarily noticed the carefully washed seams of the scar near his
Prince Andrew glanced at Kutuzov's face only a foot distant from him and

if speaking to himself.
a tenth part of his detachment returns I shall thank God," he added as
penetration he understood all that was passing in Bolkonski's mind. "If
"There is still much, much before us," he said, as if with an old man's

They got into the carriage and drove for a few minutes in silence.

added: "I need good officers myself, need them myself!"
"Get in," said Kutuzov, and noticing that Bolkonski still delayed, he

with Prince Bagration's detachment."
"Your excellency, I should like to be of use here. Allow me to remain

"Get in with me," said he to Bolkonski.
"Christ be with you!" Kutuzov repeated and went toward his carriage.

instead.
habitual, offering his puffy cheek, but Bagration kissed him on the neck
a ring, he made the sign of the cross over him with a gesture evidently
hand he drew Bagration toward him, and with his right, on which he wore
His face suddenly softened and tears came into his eyes. With his left

Christ be with you in your great endeavor!"
"Well, good-by, Prince," said he to Bagration. "My blessing, and may

Kutuzov went out into the porch with Bagration.

"Ah, from Vienna? Very good. Later, later!"

loudly, handing Kutuzov an envelope.
"I have the honor to present myself," repeated Prince Andrew rather

impassive face of Oriental type, came out after the commander-in-chief.
Bagration, a gaunt middle-aged man of medium height with a firm,

"One moment, your excellency."

"Well, have you finished?" said he to Kozlovski.

straight at his adjutant's face without recognizing him.
thoughts and anxieties as to be oblivious of his presence. He looked
commander in chief's one sound eye showed him to be so preoccupied with
Prince Andrew stood right in front of Kutuzov but the expression of the
Kutuzov with his eagle nose and puffy face appeared in the doorway.
as he was going to open it the sounds ceased, the door opened, and
Prince Andrew moved toward the door from whence voices were heard. Just

"Nothing of the sort. Orders are issued for a battle."

"What about capitulation?"

"Immediately, Prince," said Kozlovski. "Dispositions for Bagration."

He turned to Kozlovski with urgent questions.

disastrous was about to happen.
near the window, Prince Andrew felt that something important and
in chief, and from the noisy laughter of the Cossacks holding the horses
Kozlovski were squatting on the floor by a tub so near to the commander
disrespectful manner of the exhausted clerk, the fact that the clerk and
sound of these voices, the inattentive way Kozlovski looked at him, the
dissatisfied, interrupted by another, an unfamiliar voice. From the
Through the door came the sounds of Kutuzov's voice, excited and

and disrespectfully at Kozlovski.
"One can't write so fast, your honor," said the clerk, glancing angrily

clerk. "The Kiev Grenadiers, Podolian..."
"Second line... have you written it?" he continued dictating to the

Prince Andrew and did not even nod to him.
looked worn--he too had evidently not slept all night. He glanced at
up, was hastily writing at a tub turned bottom upwards. Kozlovski's face
squatting on his heels in front of a clerk. The clerk, with cuffs turned
general who had succeeded Schmidt. In the passage little Kozlovski was
house with Prince Bagration and Weyrother. Weyrother was the Austrian
Andrew entered the passage. Kutuzov himself, he was told, was in the
suite, with their Cossacks who were talking loudly together, Prince
Passing by Kutuzov's carriage and the exhausted saddle horses of his

where the commander-in-chief was.
quite abominable!" said Prince Andrew, and he went off to the house
"Well, all I can make out is that everything is abominable, abominable,

"I can't make out at all," said Nesvitski.

"What is the commander-in-chief doing here?" he asked.

the convoy officer.
He had just remembered his recent encounter with the doctor's wife and

"It's nothing," replied Prince Andrew.

Prince Andrew winced as at an electric shock.
with you? You must be ill to shiver like that," he added, noticing that
mountains with. It's a bad lookout, old fellow! But what's the matter
"They've made up splendid packs for me--fit to cross the Bohemian
"Well, I have got all I need into packs for two horses," said Nesvitski.

"We are to spend the night in Znaim."

"Where are headquarters?"

adjutant.
Prince. And God only knows where your man Peter is," said the other
"You won't be able to find either your baggage or anything else now,

something to eat."
getting it still worse," said Nesvitski. "But sit down and have
"And we, my dear boy! It's terrible! I was wrong to laugh at Mack, we're

do to get here."
"I was going to ask you. I know nothing except that it was all I could

"Well, is it true that it's peace and capitulation?" asked Nesvitski.

"Here, in that house," answered the adjutant.

"Where is the commander-in-chief?" asked Bolkonski.

was particularly noticeable on Nesvitski's usually laughing countenance.
had any news. On their familiar faces he read agitation and alarm. This
having something to eat. They hastily turned round to him asking if he
Entering the house, Prince Andrew saw Nesvitski and another adjutant

"Bolkonski! Bolkonski!... Don't you hear? Eh? Come quick..." he shouted.

flourishing his arm, called him to enter.
window. Nesvitski, moving his moist lips as he chewed something, and
He turned round. Nesvitski's handsome face looked out of the little

name.
to the window of the first house, when a familiar voice called him by
is a mob of scoundrels and not an army," he was thinking as he went up
out the stinging and tormenting thoughts that confused his mind. "This
intending to rest if but for a moment, eat something, and try to sort
On reaching the village he dismounted and went to the nearest house,

was.
galloped on to the village where he was told that the commander-in-chief
sense of disgust the minutest details of this humiliating scene he
doctor's wife, who was calling him her deliverer, and recalling with a
Prince Andrew without lifting his eyes rode hastily away from the

disorder," he muttered. "Do as you like."
"It's all the fault of these fellows on the staff that there's this

The officer flourished his arm and hastily rode away.

"Kind...ly let--them--pass!"

riding whip.
Andrew, his face distorted with fury, rode up to him and raised his
instinct urged him on. Before the officer finished his sentence Prince
what he dreaded more than anything in the world--to ridicule; but his
championship of the doctor's wife in her queer trap might expose him to
rage when a man does not know what he is saying. He saw that his
Prince Andrew saw that the officer was in that state of senseless, tipsy

behind.
"That was a nice snub for the little aide-de-camp," came a voice from

expression evidently pleased him.
Go back or I'll flatten you into a pancake," repeated he. This
"who are you? Are you in command here? Eh? I am commander here, not you!
"And who are you?" cried the officer, turning on him with tipsy rage,

lips.
"Let them pass, I tell you!" repeated Prince Andrew, compressing his

soldier. "I'll teach you to push on!... Back!"
The officer glanced at him, and without replying turned again to the

Andrew riding up to the officer.
"Kindly let this cart pass. Don't you see it's a woman?" said Prince

doctor's wife.
"Mr. Aide-de-camp! Help me!... What does it all mean?" screamed the

soldier. "Turn back with your slut!"
"I'll flatten you into a pancake!" shouted the angry officer to the

our people..."
Chasseurs.... They won't let us pass, we are left behind and have lost
What will become of us? I am the wife of the doctor of the Seventh
"Mr. Aide-de-camp! Mr. Aide-de-camp!... For heaven's sake... Protect me!

and, waving her thin arms from under the woolen shawl, cried:
piercingly. Seeing Prince Andrew she leaned out from behind the apron
of his whip fell on the apron of the equipage. The woman screamed
the woman's vehicle for trying to get ahead of others, and the strokes
officer in charge of transport was beating the soldier who was driving
diverted by the desperate shrieks of the woman in the vehicle. An
was just putting his question to a soldier when his attention was
apron under the leather hood of the vehicle. Prince Andrew rode up and
soldier was driving, and a woman enveloped in shawls sat behind the
looking like something between a cart, a cabriolet, and a caleche. A
evidently rigged up by soldiers out of any available materials and
convoy. Directly opposite to him came a strange one-horse vehicle,
Wishing to find out where the commander-in-chief was, he rode up to a

Bilibin's words.
"Here is our dear Orthodox Russian army," thought Bolkonski, recalling

that they despaired of the possibility of checking this disorder.
voices were but feebly heard amid the uproar and one saw by their faces
directing the march rode backward and forward between the carts. Their
traces broke, and lungs were strained with shouting. The officers
pushed the guns and wagons themselves. Whips cracked, hoofs slipped,
din of shouting more incessant. Soldiers floundering knee-deep in mud
each ascent or descent of the road the crowds were yet denser and the
returned from them dragging sheep, fowls, hay, and bulging sacks. At
companies, crowds of whom set off to the neighboring villages, or
sat waiting for something, and again soldiers straggling from their
flayed, some not, and broken-down carts beside which solitary soldiers
All along the sides of the road fallen horses were to be seen, some
urging of horses, and the swearing of soldiers, orderlies, and officers.
gun carriages, the tramp of horses, the crack of whips, shouts, the
could reach, there were the rattle of wheels, the creaking of carts and
sometimes four abreast. From all sides, behind and before, as far as ear
kinds overtaking one another and blocking the muddy road, three and
carts, guns, artillery, and again baggage wagons and vehicles of all
He looked with disdain at the endless confused mass of detachments,

army at Ulm)."
by English gold, we shall cause to share the same fate--(the fate of the
* "That Russian army which has been brought from the ends of the earth


thought. "Well, if need be, I shall do it no worse than others."
a hope of glory. "And should there be nothing left but to die?" he
astonishment at the genius of his hero, a feeling of wounded pride, and
his army at the beginning of the campaign, and they awoke in him
l'armee d'Ulm)." * He remembered these words in Bonaparte's address to
de l'univers, nous allons lui faire eprouver le meme sort--(le sort de
"Cette armee russe que l'or de l'Angleterre a transportee des extremites

the troops in their disorderly flight confirmed these rumors.
position of the army reached him as he went along, and the appearance of
commander-in-chief and of his own luggage. Very sinister reports of the
weary, making his way past the baggage wagons, rode in search of the
took a horse and a Cossack from a Cossack commander, and hungry and
with carts that it was impossible to get by in a carriage. Prince Andrew
great haste and in the greatest disorder. The road was so obstructed
Andrew struck the high road along which the Russian army was moving with
baggage was already being dispatched to Olmutz. Near Hetzelsdorf Prince
In Brunn everybody attached to the court was packing up, and the heavy

fearing to be captured by the French on the way to Krems.
set off to rejoin the army, not knowing where he would find it and
That same night, having taken leave of the Minister of War, Bolkonski

CHAPTER XIII




"My dear fellow, you are a hero!" said Bilibin.

"I am going to save the army."
"I cannot argue about it," replied Prince Andrew coldly, but he thought:

insoluble.
And Bilibin unwrinkled his temple, feeling that the dilemma was

disgrace with Kutuzov's whole army."
your regiment before peace is concluded, or you will share defeat and
and the skin over his left temple puckered, "either you will not reach
going, when you might remain here? You are faced by one of two things,"
"I am speaking sincerely as a friend! Consider! Where and why are you

"Do stop joking, Bilibin," cried Bolkonski.

decent town. You and I will travel comfortably in my caleche."
ill luck takes us. They say we are going to Olmutz, and Olmutz is a very
dismissed from here; therefore, you can stay and go with us wherever our
anything else.... You have not been ordered to return and have not been
is to take care of yourself. Leave it to those who are no longer fit for
side of the question and you will see that your duty, on the contrary,
"But as you are a philosopher, be a consistent one, look at the other

"Not at all," said Prince Andrew.

heroism!"
army now that it is in danger. I understand that. Mon cher, it is
"Why are you going? I know you think it your duty to gallop back to the

Prince Andrew looked inquiringly at him and gave no reply.

vanished from his face.
And in proof of the conclusiveness of his opinion all the wrinkles

thinking about you. Why are you going?"
"Do you know, mon cher," said Bilibin following him, "I have been

his room.
And Prince Andrew after giving directions about his departure went to

"But now I am off at once."

"But you meant to stay another two days?"

"To the army."

"Where to?"

"I am going away."

and was going toward his room.
"Where are you off to?" he said suddenly to Prince Andrew who had risen

slight smile he began to examine his nails.
hitherto puckered brow became smooth as a sign of pleasure, and with a
produced a good epigram, a fresh one that would be repeated. His
a bit of Mack. We are Macked)," he concluded, feeling that he had
expression. "C'est... c'est du Mack. Nous sommes mackes (It is... it is
at Ulm... it is..."--he seemed to be trying to find the right
Bilibin. "It's not treachery nor rascality nor stupidity: it is just as
"Not that either. That puts the court in too bad a light," replied

glory that awaited him.
overcoats, wounds, the smoke of gunpowder, the sounds of firing, and the
"It may be treachery," said Prince Andrew, vividly imagining the gray

be firing at the enemy.
* (2) That their fire gets into his eyes and he forgets that he ought to

* Bridgehead.


rascality...."
of the Thabor Bridge is delightful! It is not exactly stupidity, nor
orders the sergeant to be arrested. Come, you must own that this affair
a stroke of genius. Prince Auersperg feels his dignity at stake and
discipline, if you allow a subordinate to address you like that!' It was
Gascon) and says: 'I don't recognize the world-famous Austrian
to speak, turns to Auersperg with feigned astonishment (he is a true
the French!' Murat, seeing that all is lost if the sergeant is allowed
goes up to Auersperg and says: 'Prince, you are being deceived, here are
stayed his hand. The sergeant, who was evidently wiser than his general,
troops were running onto the bridge, was about to fire, but Lannes
the mines and blow up the bridge, this sergeant, seeing that the French
sergeant in charge of the cannon which was to give the signal to fire
subsiding under the delightful interest of his own story, "is that the
bridge is taken! But what is best of all," he went on, his excitement
"The French battalion rushes to the bridgehead, spikes the guns, and the
forget to pause after this mot to give time for its due appreciation.
l'ennemi!" *(2) In spite of the animation of his speech, Bilibin did not
n'y voit que du feu, et oublie celui qu'il devait faire faire sur
and so dazzled by the sight of Murat's mantle and ostrich plumes, qu'il
flattered by his rapidly established intimacy with the French marshals,
Gascons indeed, so bewildered him with fine words, and he is so
to make Prince Auersperg's acquaintance.' In a word, those gentlemen,
shake one another's hand.... The Emperor Napoleon burns with impatience
Austrian army, hero of the Turkish wars Hostilities are ended, we can
Prince Auersperg von Mautern himself. 'Dearest foe! Flower of the
the tete-de-pont. At length appears the lieutenant general, our dear
flings the bags of incendiary material into the water, and approaches
cannon, and meanwhile a French battalion gets to the bridge unobserved,
Auersperg; these gentlemen embrace the officers, crack jokes, sit on the
desire to see Prince Auersperg, and so on. The officer sends for
the Emperor Francis is arranging a meeting with Bonaparte, that they
They spin him a thousand gasconades, saying that the war is over, that
negotiate with Prince Auersperg. He lets them enter the tete-de-pont. *
assure the officer on duty that they, the marshals, are on their way to
gentlemen ride onto the bridge alone and wave white handkerchiefs; they
"I am not jesting," Bilibin went on. "Nothing is truer or sadder. These

"Stop this jesting," he said.

executing of the plan.
that could save the army, and how he alone would be entrusted with the
he would give an opinion at the war council which would be the only one
Listening to Bilibin he was already imagining how on reaching the army
the ranks of obscure officers and offer him the first step to fame!
out of this position; that here was the Toulon that would lift him from
situation it occurred to him that it was he who was destined to lead it
As soon as he learned that the Russian army was in such a hopeless

grieved him and yet he was pleased.
"Stop jesting," said Prince Andrew sadly and seriously. This news

* The marshalls.


on us, you, and your lines of communication."
and now with their whole army are on this side of the Danube, marching
let's!' say the others. And off they go and take the bridge, cross it,
Napoleon if we take this bridge, so let us three go and take it!' 'Yes,
and not let us cross? But it will please our sovereign the Emperor
an army of fifteen thousand men has been ordered to blow up the bridge
doubly mined and that there are menacing fortifications at its head and
'Gentlemen,' says one of them, 'you know the Thabor Bridge is mined and
and ride to the bridge. (Observe that all three are Gascons.)
gentlemen, messieurs les marechaux, * Murat, Lannes, and Belliard, mount
as I told you. Very well. Next day, which was yesterday, those
"That's just it," answered Bilibin. "Listen! The French entered Vienna

will be cut off," said he.
"But if the bridge is crossed it means that the army too is lost? It

Bolkonski shrugged his shoulders.

"That is what I ask you. No one, not even Bonaparte, knows why."

"What? Here? But why did they not blow up the bridge, if it was mined?"

now rushing along the road to Brunn and will be here in a day or two."
Auersperg was defending, and the bridge was not blown up: so Murat is
"What's it all about? Why, the French have crossed the bridge that

"I did not... What is it all about?" inquired Prince Andrew impatiently.

"And you didn't see that everybody is packing up?"

"I come from the archduchess'. I heard nothing there."

knows?"
"But where do you come from not to know what every coachman in the town

Prince Andrew could not understand.

blow!"
the Thabor Bridge, at Vienna.... They have crossed without striking a
"There now! Confess that this is delightful," said he. "This affair of

Bilibin came out to meet him. His usually calm face showed excitement.

"Eh? What?" asked Prince Andrew.

scoundrel is again at our heels!"
portmanteau into the vehicle, "we are to move on still farther. The
"Oh, your excellency!" said Franz, with difficulty rolling the

"What is it?" he asked.

time in the shop.
provide himself with some books for the campaign, and had spent some
Before returning to Bilibin's Prince Andrew had gone to a bookshop to

the front door.
Bilibin's man, was dragging a portmanteau with some difficulty out of
to Brunn. At the door he found a vehicle half full of luggage. Franz,
house thinking out a letter to his father about the battle and his visit
the afternoon, having made all his calls, he was returning to Bilibin's
calling on the principal Austrian dignitaries. Between four and five in
Bolkonski was invited everywhere, and had to spend the whole morning
Grand Cross of Maria Theresa, and the whole army received rewards.
received. A thanksgiving service was arranged, Kutuzov was awarded the
Contrary to Bilibin's forecast the news he had brought was joyfully

the shoulder, led him to the window, and began to talk to him.
seconds collected his thoughts. Then the Russian ambassador took him by
also wished to see him. He did not know whom to answer, and for a few
Empress' chamberlain invited him to see Her Majesty. The archduchess
Order of the third grade, which the Emperor was conferring on him. The
The Minister of War came up and congratulated him on the Maria Theresa
him for not having stayed at the palace, and offered him his own house.
friendly looks and heard friendly words. Yesterday's adjutant reproached
was immediately surrounded by courtiers on all sides. Everywhere he saw
The Emperor thanked Prince Andrew and bowed. Prince Andrew withdrew and

"At seven o'clock? It's very sad, very sad!"

"At seven o'clock, I believe."

"At what o'clock was General Schmidt killed?"

The Emperor interrupted him.

"Forage has not been supplied to the extent..."

"Is there sufficient forage in Krems?"

night."
"According to the scouts the last of them crossed on rafts during the

"The French have abandoned the left bank?"

"Three and a half miles, Your Majesty."

"From Durrenstein to Krems."

"From where to where, Your Majesty?"

"How many miles?"

and interrupted him.
ready in his mind, of all he knew and had seen. But the Emperor smiled
that he would have a chance to give a reliable account, which he had
the afternoon," replied Bolkonski growing more animated and expecting
front, but at Durrenstein, where I was, our attack began after five in
"I cannot inform Your Majesty at what o'clock the battle began at the

"At what o'clock did the battle begin?" asked the Emperor.

to these questions, as was only too evident, did not interest him.
as if his sole aim were to put a given number of questions--the answers
"Was Kutuzov well? When had he left Krems?" and so on. The Emperor spoke
Prince Andrew replied. Then followed other questions just as simple:

"Tell me, when did the battle begin?" he asked hurriedly.

seemed confused and blushed as if not knowing what to say.
conversation began Prince Andrew was struck by the fact that the Emperor
Francis received him standing in the middle of the room. Before the
Bolkonski that the Emperor desired to give him an audience. The Emperor
the adjutant he had seen the previous day ceremoniously informed
face and just nodded to him with his long head. But after it was over,
been told to, and the Emperor Francis merely looked fixedly into his
At the levee Prince Andrew stood among the Austrian officers as he had

CHAPTER XII




will see."
audiences, but he does not like talking himself and can't do it, as you
"Well, talk as much as you can, anyway. He has a passion for giving

can't," replied Bolkonski, smiling.
"I should like to speak well of them, but as far as I know the facts, I

accompanying him to the hall.
that provisions are supplied and the routes indicated," said Bilibin,
"When speaking to the Emperor, try as far as you can to praise the way

early to dinner," cried several voices. "We'll take you in hand."
"Oh! Oh! Oh! Well, au revoir, Bolkonski! Au revoir, Prince! Come back

"To the Emperor."

"Where to?"

looking at his watch.
gentlemen, it is already time for me to go," replied Prince Andrew
"I shall scarcely be able to avail myself of your hospitality,

interests," said Bilibin.
"In general we must turn this bloodthirsty soldier to more humane

kissing his finger tips.
"We must let him see Amelie, she's exquisite!" said one of "ours,"

women."
undertake the theater, I society, and you, Hippolyte, of course the
beg you all to help me. Brunn's attractions must be shown him. You can
but here, in this wretched Moravian hole, it is more difficult, and I
all the pleasures of life here. If we were in Vienna it would be easy,
house and in Brunn itself. I want to entertain him as far as I can, with
"Well now, gentlemen," said Bilibin, "Bolkonski is my guest in this

laughter that convulsed his usually impassive features.
distressed, and breathed painfully, but could not restrain the wild
Everybody laughed, and Hippolyte louder than anyone. He was evidently

satisfaction.
mouth!" said Bilibin, and the mop of hair on his head moved with
"Demosthenes, I know thee by the pebble thou secretest in thy golden

he released Bolkonski's arm to indicate that he had now quite finished.
nonreceipt of our dispatch of November 18. That is how it will end." And
nonintervention. And..." he paused. "Finally one cannot impute the
the arm, "I believe that intervention will be stronger than
"Wait, I have not finished..." he said to Prince Andrew, seizing him by

His Majesty the Emperor derogates from the principle of our alliance...
expressing... as in its last note... you understand... Besides, unless
Hippolyte gazing round with importance at the others, "without
"The Berlin cabinet cannot express a feeling of alliance," began

two.
him about politics. Prince Andrew and the others gathered round these
He sat down beside Hippolyte and wrinkling his forehead began talking to

is exquisite when he discusses politics--you should see his gravity!"
"Oh, I must give you a treat," Bilibin whispered to Bolkonski. "Kuragin

almost been jealous on his wife's account, was the butt of this set.
and Prince Andrew saw that Hippolyte, of whom--he had to admit--he had
Bilibin and the rest of "ours" burst out laughing in Hippolyte's face,

* "Woman is man's companion."


began looking through a lorgnette at his elevated legs.
"La femme est la compagne de l'homme," * announced Prince Hippolyte, and

the women!"
Russian army) are nothing compared to what this man has been doing among
"that all the atrocities of the French army (I nearly said of the
"You, Bolkonski, don't know," said Bilibin turning to Prince Andrew,

"Oh, you Don Juan! You serpent!" cried several voices.

"Tell me about that!" he said.

arm. He began to laugh.
Prince Hippolyte was lolling in a lounge chair with his legs over its

advantage of it!"
that that man suffers, and this Don Juan, wicked fellow, is taking
"But the worst of it, gentlemen--I am giving Kuragin away to you--is

Can you fancy the figure he cut?..."
appointment to London was a promotion and that he was so to regard it.
fellow diplomat, "that the Chancellor told him flatly that his
"But the best of it was," said one, telling of the misfortune of a

* Ours.


jests and gossip.
about the army and the battle, and then the talk went off into merry
politeness and to start conversation, they asked him a few questions
as one of themselves, an honor they did not extend to many. From
the official side of the service. These gentlemen received Prince Andrew
war or politics but related to high society, to certain women, and to
diplomats, evidently had its own interests which had nothing to do with
leader, called les notres. * This set, consisting almost exclusively of
men, who here, as in Vienna, formed a special set which Bilibin, their
The gentlemen assembled at Bilibin's were young, wealthy, gay society

introduced him to the others.
secretary to the embassy, Bolkonski was already acquainted. Bilibin
of the diplomatic corps. With Prince Hippolyte Kuragin, who was a
and handsome, with his hand bandaged. In the study were four gentlemen
not worn for a long time, he went into Bilibin's study fresh, animated,
dressed for his attendance at court in full parade uniform, which he had
Austrian adjutant, Bilibin, and last night's conversation. Having
the Emperor Francis; he remembered the Minister of War, the polite
thought that came into his mind was that today he had to be presented to
Next day he woke late. Recalling his recent impressions, the first

CHAPTER XI




a child, he fell into a deep, youthful slumber.
"Yes, that all happened!" he said, and, smiling happily to himself like

He woke up...

childhood.
and he experienced tenfold the joy of living, as he had not done since
forward beside Schmidt with the bullets merrily whistling all around,
the French were firing, and he felt his heart palpitating as he rode
again drawn out in a thin line the musketeers were descending the hill,
and the rattling of carriage wheels seemed to fill his ears, and now
He closed his eyes, and immediately a sound of cannonading, of musketry

Emperor Francis occupied his thoughts.
new triumph, tomorrow's levee and parade, and the audience with the
from him. The alliance with Prussia, Austria's treachery, Bonaparte's
felt that the battle of which he had brought tidings was far, far away
clean shirt on the feather bed with its warmed and fragrant pillows, he
When Prince Andrew reached the room prepared for him and lay down in a

smooth as a sign that the conversation was at an end.
"If we live we shall see," replied Bilibin, his face again becoming

"Impossible!" cried Prince Andrew. "That would be too base."

* Fine eyes.


projects for peace, a secret peace concluded separately."
being deceived, my instinct tells me of negotiations with France and
therefore--this is between ourselves--I instinctively feel that we are
and all this for the beaux yeux * of His Sardinian Majesty. And
Russian army loots terribly--her army is destroyed, her capital taken,
place because her provinces have been pillaged--they say the Holy
used to it. She will retaliate. And she has been fooled in the first
"This is what I think. Austria has been made a fool of, and she is not

campaign is over?"
"But joking apart," said Prince Andrew, "do you really think the

* "We must let him off the u!"


shall certainly adopt an innovation and call him simply Bonaparte!"
laws for Austria at Schonbrunn, il faut lui faire grace de l'u! * I
repeated, accentuating the u: "I think, however, now that he lays down
indicate that he was about to say something witty. "Buonaparte?" he
"Buonaparte?" said Bilibin inquiringly, puckering up his forehead to

the man has!"
clenching his small hand and striking the table with it, "and what luck
"What an extraordinary genius!" Prince Andrew suddenly exclaimed,

Campo Formio are to be drawn up."
is merely a question of settling where the preliminaries of the new
Allies, Austria's hand will be forced and there will be war. If not it
Alexander and the King of Prussia in Berlin? If Prussia joins the
"The only question is what will come of the meeting between the Emperor
of his own mots, releasing the wrinkles on his forehead, and pausing.
decide the matter, but those who devised it," said Bilibin quoting one
be your skirmishing at Durrenstein, or gunpowder at all, that will
say so. It will be as I said at the beginning of the campaign, it won't
"Well, I think it is. The bigwigs here think so too, but they daren't

Andrew.
"But still this does not mean that the campaign is over," said Prince

between two fires."
Bohemia, and you and your army would have spent a bad quarter of an hour
it up. Otherwise we should long ago have been in the mountains of
hope it will not be, for it is mined and orders have been given to blow
Vienna is on the other side. No, the bridge has not yet been taken and I
us--doing it very badly, I think, but still he is defending us. But
"Prince Auersperg is on this, on our side of the river, and is defending

Prince Auersperg was defending Vienna?" he said.
its celebrated bridgehead and Prince Auersperg? We heard reports that
Austria's capital. "How is it Vienna was taken? What of the bridge and
was really of small importance in view of such events as the fall of
Andrew, beginning to understand that his news of the battle before Krems
"Really I don't care about that, I don't care at all," said Prince

received as a savior."
victory is not a matter for great rejoicing and that you can't be
described: Prince Murat et tout le tremblement... You see that your
showed me a letter in which the parade of the French in Vienna was fully
"Count Lichtenfels was here this morning," Bilibin continued, "and

the full significance of the words he heard.
especially after having dined, Bolkonski felt that he could not take in
After the fatigues and impressions of the journey, his reception, and

dear Count Vrbna, goes to him for orders."
"Not only occupied, but Bonaparte is at Schonbrunn, and the count, our

"What? Occupied? Vienna occupied?"

army!"
of events? It's too late now when Vienna is occupied by the French
Karl gained a victory, what effect would that have on the general course
Besides, suppose you did gain a brilliant victory, if even the Archduke
have been conceived. It's as if it had been done on purpose, on purpose.
on the victory! Admit that more irritating news than yours could not
all loved, Schmidt, you expose to a bullet, and then you congratulate us
with us, but heaven help you and your capital!' The one general whom we
You abandon Vienna, give up its defense--as much as to say: 'Heaven is
Archduke Karl does nothing, the Archduke Ferdinand disgraces himself.
cannon! But this sort of thing seems done on purpose to vex us. The
of Bonaparte's, that will be another story and we'll fire off some
good as another, as you know) and even if it is only over a fire brigade
news of a victory by the Archduke Karl or Ferdinand (one archduke's as
we, I mean the Austrian court, care for your victories? Bring us nice
Russia, for the Orthodox Greek faith! All that is beautiful, but what do
"That's just it, my dear fellow. You see it's hurrah for the Tsar, for

and the Minister of War does not even care to hear the details."
real victory, destroying the spell of the invincibility of the French,
of life and make blunder after blunder. Kutuzov alone at last gains a
a whole army, the Archduke Ferdinand and the Archduke Karl give no signs
here beyond my feeble intelligence, but I can't make it out. Mack loses
confess I do not understand: perhaps there are diplomatic subtleties
"It is now my turn to ask you 'why?' mon cher," said Bolkonski. "I

forehead.
He looked straight at Prince Andrew and suddenly unwrinkled his

we have no Prater here..."
Franz a thaler, or let him go with his Liebchen to the Prater... True,
Russian Embassy, do not feel any need in token of my joy to give my
not much delighted by your victory. Even I, a poor secretary of the
of War but also his Most August Majesty the Emperor and King Francis is
didn't you capture him? So don't be surprised if not only the Minister
marshals, sitting on a sofa by the fire! That is true, but still why
"I know," interrupted Bilibin, "you're thinking it's very easy to take

the same tone.
methods that he had better leave Genoa alone?" retorted Prince Andrew in
"Why did you not succeed in impressing on Bonaparte by diplomatic

ought to have been there at seven in the morning."
been there at seven in the morning," returned Bilibin with a smile. "You
"And why didn't you do it at seven in the morning? You ought to have

in the morning but had not reached it by five in the afternoon."
a parade. We had expected, as I told you, to get at their rear by seven
"Because not everything happens as one expects or with the smoothness of

"Why didn't you capture one, just one, marshal for us?"

boasting that it was a little better than at Ulm..."
"But seriously," said Prince Andrew, "we can at any rate say without

Where's the victory?"
his one division, and even then Mortier slips through your fingers!
"Come now! You with all your forces fall on the unfortunate Mortier and

Russian on which he wished to put a contemptuous emphasis.
He went on talking in this way in French, uttering only those words in

army, I must say that your victory was not particularly victorious."
* "But my dear fellow, with all my respect for the Orthodox Russian


n'est pas des plus victorieuses." *
je professe pour the Orthodox Russian army, j'avoue que votre victoire
and puckering the skin above his left eye, "malgre la haute estime que
"Cependant, mon cher," he remarked, examining his nails from a distance

Bilibin smiled and the wrinkles on his face disappeared.

skittles," said he in conclusion.
"They received me and my news as one receives a dog in a game of

engagement and his reception by the Minister of War.
Bolkonski, very modestly without once mentioning himself, described the

"Well, now tell me about your exploits," said he.

twinkled and looked out straight.
wrinkles would crease his cheeks. His small, deep-set eyes always
and his eyebrows were lifted, then his eyebrows would descend and deep
of expression on his face. Now his forehead would pucker into deep folds
Russian bath. The movement of these wrinkles formed the principal play
looked as clean and well washed as the tips of one's fingers after a
His thin, worn, sallow face was covered with deep wrinkles, which always

considered important.
the Viennese drawing rooms and often had an influence on matters
drawing room. And, in fact, Bilibin's witticisms were hawked about in
that insignificant society people might carry them from drawing room to
inner laboratory of his mind in a portable form as if intentionally, so
finished phrases of general interest. These sayings were prepared in the
possible. His conversation was always sprinkled with wittily original,
something striking and took part in a conversation only when that was
elegantly witty. In society he always awaited an opportunity to say
Bilibin liked conversation as he liked work, only when it could be made

his skill in dealing and conversing with those in the highest spheres.
Bilibin's services were valued not only for what he wrote, but also for
circular, memorandum, or report, skillfully, pointedly, and elegantly.
might be he did not care, but it gave him great pleasure to prepare a
the question "How?" that interested him. What the diplomatic matter
whatever the import of his work. It was not the question "What for?" but
sometimes spend a whole night at his writing table. He worked well
liking work, knew how to do it, and despite his indolence would
avoid doing certain things, and speak French. He was one of those, who,
diplomats who are esteemed because they have certain negative qualities,
in Vienna knew him and valued him. He was not one of those many
important post in Vienna. Both the foreign minister and our ambassador
sixteen, had been in Paris and Copenhagen, and now held a rather
longer a young diplomat, as he had entered the service at the age of
promise of rising in his diplomatic career. He still a young man but no
the military profession, so to an even greater extent Bilibin gave
Just as Prince Andrew was a young man who gave promise of rising high in
had become more intimate when Prince Andrew was in Vienna with Kutuzov.
Prince Andrew. They had known each other previously in Petersburg, but
Bilibin was a man of thirty-five, a bachelor, and of the same circle as

then particularly strong.
supposed, share the general Russian antipathy to the Austrians which was
they were speaking French) at least with a Russian who would, he
after his reception by the Austrians, to speak if not in Russian (for
as he had been accustomed to from childhood. Besides it was pleasant,
Andrew felt a pleasant sense of repose among luxurious surroundings such
all the comforts of cleanliness and all the refinements of life, Prince
After his journey and the campaign during which he had been deprived of

settled down comfortably beside the fire.
luxurious study and sat down to the dinner prepared for him. Bilibin
After washing and dressing, Prince Andrew came into the diplomat's

here ill, as you see."
in. "So you're a messenger of victory, eh? Splendid! And I am sitting
things in my bedroom," said he to the servant who was ushering Bolkonski
Bilibin as he came out to meet Prince Andrew. "Franz, put the prince's
"Ah, my dear prince! I could not have a more welcome visitor," said

his in the diplomatic service.
Prince Andrew stayed at Brunn with Bilibin, a Russian acquaintance of

CHAPTER X




the memory of a remote event long past.
whole tenor of his thoughts instantaneously changed; the battle seemed
indifferent hands of the Minister of War and the polite adjutant. The
happiness the victory had afforded him had been now left in the
When Prince Andrew left the palace he felt that all the interest and

you," he added, bowing his head.
"Au revoir! Thank you very much. His Majesty will probably desire to see

reappeared.
The stupid smile, which had left his face while he was speaking,

However, I will let you know."
You must have a rest. Be at the levee tomorrow after the parade.
His Majesty will no doubt wish to see you, but not today. I thank you!
news, though Schmidt's death is a heavy price to pay for the victory.
captured." Again he pondered. "I am very glad you have brought good
"Ah what a calamity! You say the affair was decisive? But Mortier is not

at Prince Andrew, evidently considering something.
Having glanced through the dispatch he laid it on the table and looked

What a calamity!"
"Oh, my God! My God! Schmidt!" he exclaimed in German. "What a calamity!

with a mournful expression.
He took the dispatch which was addressed to him and began to read it

There has been an encounter with Mortier? A victory? It was high time!"
"From General Field Marshal Kutuzov?" he asked. "I hope it is good news?

continually receiving many petitioners one after another.
does not even attempt to hide its artificiality) of a man who is
habitual to him. His face took on the stupid artificial smile (which
expression on his face changed in a way evidently deliberate and
head, but the instant he turned to Prince Andrew the firm, intelligent
evenly, and then raised his head. He had an intellectual and distinctive
thought. The minister drew the remaining papers together, arranged them
impression. "But that is a matter of perfect indifference to me," he
with, or he wanted to give the Russian special messenger that
the Minister of War less than any of the other matters he was concerned
Prince Andrew felt that either the actions of Kutuzov's army interested

papers and still taking no notice of the special messenger.
"Take this and deliver it," said he to his adjutant, handing him the

raising his eyes at the opening of the door and the sound of footsteps.
bald head with its gray temples. He went on reading to the end, without
of his arrival. A wax candle stood at each side of the minister's bent
notes on them, and for the first two or three minutes taking no notice
minister seated at a large table reading some papers and making pencil
deliberate steps. This feeling of disdain was heightened when he saw the
disdainfully, he entered the room of the Minister of War with peculiarly
think it easy to gain victories!" he thought. His eyes narrowed
adjutant and the minister. "Away from the smell of powder, they probably
suggested to him a point of view which gave him a right to despise the
one of disdain which was quite uncalled for. His fertile mind instantly
without his noticing it the feeling of offense immediately turned into
approached the door of the minister's room. He felt offended, and
Prince Andrew's joyous feeling was considerably weakened as he

attempt at familiarity on the part of the Russian messenger.
adjutant by his elaborate courtesy appeared to wish to ward off any
corridor to the cabinet where the Minister of War was at work. The
with particular courtesy ushered Prince Andrew before him along a
in to the Minister of War. Five minutes later he returned and bowing
The adjutant on duty, meeting Prince Andrew, asked him to wait, and went

Minister of War."
the adjutant on duty," said the official. "He will conduct you to the
"To the right from the corridor, Euer Hochgeboren! There you will find

learning that he was a special messenger led him to another entrance.
to the palace, however, an official came running out to meet him, and
expected to be at once presented to the Emperor. At the chief entrance
questions that might be put to him and the answers he would give. He
stating them to the Emperor Francis. He vividly imagined the casual
dim, but definite and in the concise form in which he imagined himself
rapidity. He again vividly recalled the details of the battle, no longer
and his thoughts followed one another with extraordinary clearness and
alert than he had done the day before. Only his eyes gleamed feverishly
Prince Andrew when he drove up to the palace felt even more vigorous and
soldier after camp life. Despite his rapid journey and sleepless night,
atmosphere of a large and active town which is always so attractive to a
lights of shops, houses, and street lamps, fine carriages, and all that
streets of Brunn and found himself surrounded by high buildings, the
It was already quite dark when Prince Andrew rattled over the paved

"Good news!... Go on!" he shouted to the driver, and they galloped on.

conversation.
"What news, sir?" asked the officer, evidently anxious to start a

plenty to do still."
"Get well soon, lads!" he continued, turning to the soldiers. "There's

"That's for them all," he said to the officer who came up.

soldier three gold pieces.
answered the soldier. Prince Andrew took out his purse and gave the
action they had been wounded. "Day before yesterday, on the Danube,"
Prince Andrew told his driver to stop, and asked a soldier in what

hurrying past them.
silently, with the languid interest of sick children, at the envoy
words), others were eating bread; the more severely wounded looked
jolted over the stony road. Some of them were talking (he heard Russian
long German carts six or more pale, dirty, bandaged men were being
cart, shouting and scolding a soldier with coarse abuse. In each of the
Russian officer in charge of the transport lolled back in the front
At one of the post stations he overtook a convoy of Russian wounded. The

of the road were forests of different kinds, fields, and villages.
thawing in the sunshine, the horses galloped quickly, and on both sides
starry night was followed by a bright cheerful morning. The snow was
during the battle, and feeling reassured he dozed off.... The dark
again recalled all the details of the victory and his own calm courage
this was not so but that on the contrary the French had run away. He
quickly roused himself with a feeling of joy, as if learning afresh that
Russians were running away and that he himself was killed, but he
wheels and the sensation of victory. Then he began to imagine that the
as he closed his eyes his ears seemed filled with the rattle of the
man who has at length begun to attain a long-desired happiness. As soon
Andrew was galloping along in a post chaise enjoying the feelings of a
given him by the commander-in-chief and his fellow officers, Prince
impression his news of a victory would create, or recalling the send-off
impressions of the recent battle, picturing pleasantly to himself the
had fallen the previous day--the day of the battle. Reviewing his
The night was dark but starry, the road showed black in the snow that

meant not only a reward but an important step toward promotion.
he was sent immediately with a special dispatch to Brunn. To be so sent
Krems excited but not weary, with dispatches from Dokhturov to Kutuzov,
very muscular men, and on the night of the battle, having arrived at
build Prince Andrew could endure physical fatigue far better than many
threatened by the French) but at Brunn. Despite his apparently delicate
this victory to the Austrian court, now no longer at Vienna (which was
of the commander-in-chief's special favor he was sent with the news of
wounded under him and his own arm slightly grazed by a bullet. As a mark
General Schmidt, who was killed in the action. His horse had been
Prince Andrew during the battle had been in attendance on the Austrian

the retreat of the frightened Bonaparte.
of columns from Russia, of some victory gained by the Austrians, and of
most joyful though erroneous rumors were rife of the imaginary approach
the army considerably. Throughout the whole army and at headquarters
stand made at Krems and the victory over Mortier raised the spirits of
hospitals could no longer accommodate all the sick and wounded, yet the
the big hospitals and the houses in Krems converted into military
in which Kutuzov entrusted them to the humanity of the enemy; and though
wounded had been abandoned on the other side of the Danube with a letter
killed, wounded, sick, and stragglers; though a number of sick and
were ill-clad, exhausted, and had lost a third of their number in
not only held the field but had repulsed the French. Though the troops
fortnight's retreat, the Russian troops had halted and after a fight had
banners, cannon, and two enemy generals. For the first time, after a
and broke it up. In this action for the first time trophies were taken:
thirtieth he attacked Mortier's division, which was on the left bank,
the river between himself and the main body of the French. On the
left bank of the Danube and took up a position for the first time with
On the twenty-eighth of October Kutuzov with his army crossed to the

advancing from Russia, without losing his army as Mack had done at Ulm.
aim remaining for him was to effect a junction with the forces that were
Vienna by the Austrian Hofkriegsrath, the sole and almost unattainable
modern science of strategics, had been handed to Kutuzov when he was in
offensive, the plan of which, carefully prepared in accord with the
defense of Vienna was no longer to be thought of. Instead of an
Kutuzov was left with only his own weak and exhausted forces. The
joined Kutuzov at Braunau now separated from the Russian army, and
rapid retreat. Austrian troops that had escaped capture at Ulm and had
Russians fought, the only consequence of these actions was a yet more
courage and endurance--acknowledged even by the enemy--with which the
There had been actions at Lambach, Amstetten, and Melk; but despite the
necessary to enable it to retreat without losing its heavy equipment.
overtaken by the enemy and fighting rearguard actions only as far as
Kutuzov was hurriedly retreating along the Danube, stopping where
been foreseen, the Russian army of thirty-five thousand men commanded by
and compelled to act under conditions of war unlike anything that had
losing confidence in its allies, suffering from shortness of supplies,
of Bonaparte, encountering a population that was unfriendly to it,
Pursued by the French army of a hundred thousand men under the command

CHAPTER IX




pronouncing the phrase "knocked out" with ringing distinctness.
and one knocked out," he added, unable to restrain a happy smile, and
"A trifle," said the colonel in his bass voice: "two hussars wounded,

"And if he asks about the losses?"

triumphantly and gaily.
"Inform the prince that I the bridge fired!" said the colonel

promoted to a sublieutenancy."
"Here's something for you to report," said Zherkov. "See if I don't get

the cadet under fire for the first time had experienced.
true. No one had taken any notice, for everyone knew the sensation which
"Well, it seems that no one has noticed," thought Rostov. And this was

the colonel, Nesvitski, Zherkov, and the officer from the suite.
And Denisov rode up to a group that had stopped near Rostov, composed of

a target."
But this sort of thing is the very devil, with them shooting at you like
it's nasty work! An attack's pleasant work! Hacking away at the dogs!
"Yes and no mistake!" cried Denisov. "You worked like wegular bwicks and

"Was that grapeshot?" he asked Denisov.

from the orderly and began to mount.
sighing deeply he took Rook, his horse, which stood resting one foot,
"It's all over; but I am a coward--yes, a coward!" thought Rostov, and

his ear.
"Well, fwiend? So you've smelt powdah!" shouted Vaska Denisov just above

sounded louder and calmer, the stretchers disappeared from sight.
The hussars ran back to the men who held their horses; their voices

me!" Rostov whispered.
"O Lord God! Thou who art in that heaven, save, forgive, and protect

feeling of sickening agitation.
the stretchers, and love of the sun and of life, all merged into one
stretchers came into view before Rostov. And the fear of death and of
At that instant the sun began to hide behind the clouds, and other

the sun, this water, that gorge!..."
here above me and around... Another instant and I shall never again see
all running back somewhere, and I shall run with them, and it, death, is
uncertainty and hurry... There--they are shouting again, and again are
is so much happiness; but here... groans, suffering, fear, and this
were there," thought Rostov. "In myself alone and in that sunshine there
and happiness... "I should wish for nothing else, nothing, if only I
the pine forests veiled in the mist of their summits... There was peace
blue mountains beyond the river, the nunnery, the mysterious gorges, and
waters of the distant Danube shone. And fairer still were the faraway
bright and glorious was the setting sun! With what soft glitter the
sun. How beautiful the sky looked; how blue, how calm, and how deep! How
into the distance, at the waters of the Danube, at the sky, and at the
Nicholas Rostov turned away and, as if searching for something, gazed

he was lifted and laid on the stretcher.
"Oooh! For Christ's sake let me alone!" cried the wounded man, but still

hussar and began lifting him.
the others. Again someone shouted, "Stretchers!" Four men seized the
to him fell against the rails with a groan. Rostov ran up to him with
rattle on the bridge as if nuts were being spilt, and the hussar nearest
other soldiers. He stood looking about him, when suddenly he heard a
bridge because he had not brought any burning straw with him like the
always imagined battles to himself), nor could he help to fire the
bridge not knowing what to do. There was no one to hew down (as he had
Rostov, absorbed by his relations with Bogdanich, had paused on the

knocked three of them over.
high, but the last round fell in the midst of a group of hussars and
got back to their horses. Two were misdirected and the shot went too
The French had time to fire three rounds of grapeshot before the hussars

someone to fire at.
longer to hinder them but because the guns were trained and there was
setting it on fire and the French batteries were now firing at them, no
as a dense cloud of smoke arose from it. The hussars had succeeded in
bridge. But this time Nesvitski could not see what was happening there,
at irregular intervals, and grapeshot cracked and rattled onto the
uniforms advanced toward the bridge at a run. Smoke appeared again but
The French guns were hastily reloaded. The infantry in their blue

"If I were Tsar I would never go to war," said Nesvitski, turning away.

"Two, I think."

the suite by the arm. "Look! A man has fallen! Fallen, fallen!"
"Oh! Oh!" groaned Nesvitski as if in fierce pain, seizing the officer of

reports one after another, and a third.
moment when the first report was heard a fourth was seen. Then two
appeared, then a second and a third almost simultaneously, and at the
On the French side, amid the groups with cannon, a cloud of smoke

and hurriedly removed.
He pointed to the French guns, the limbers of which were being detached

"There now!" said the officer of the suite, "that's grapeshot."

things are done."
recommended for honors and he may get a ribbon. Our Bogdanich knows how
and ribbon? But now, even if they do get peppered, the squadron may be
at things! Send two men? And who then would give us the Vladimir medal
was speaking in jest or in earnest. "Ah, your excellency! How you look
but still with that naive air that made it impossible to know whether he
"Ah, your excellency," put in Zherkov, his eyes fixed on the hussars,

the job just as well."
"True enough," answered Nesvitski; "two smart fellows could have done

"He shouldn't have taken so many men," said the officer of the suite.

grapeshot range now."
"Ugh. The hussars will get it hot!" said Nesvitski; "they are within

bayonets and guns.
light and the blue tunics advancing from the other side with their
sinking heart--watching the bridge and the hussars in the bright evening
the high ground above the bridge involuntarily asked himself with a
and wipe them out?" These were the questions each man of the troops on
there and fire the bridge or will the French get within grapeshot range
"Will they burn the bridge or not? Who'll get there first? Will they get

and groups with horses, easily recognizable as artillery.
approaching in the distance from the opposite side--the blue uniforms
riding breeches, who were swarming near the bridge, and then at what was
with yellow shakos, dark-green jackets braided with cord, and blue
together out of range of the shots, watching, now the small group of men
Meanwhile Nesvitski, Zherkov, and the officer of the suite were standing

his saddle.
"Oh, every bullet has its billet," answered Vaska Denisov, turning in

"Why run risks, Captain? You should dismount," he said.

his courage, had ridden on to the planks of the bridge:
back, Cadet!" he cried angrily; and turning to Denisov, who, showing off
"Who's that running on the middle of the bridge? To the right! Come

to him:
better. But Bogdanich, without looking at or recognizing Rostov, shouted
was about to run on, thinking that the farther he went to the front the
Rostov wiping his muddy hands on his breeches looked at his enemy and

triumphant, cheerful face.
ridden ahead, had pulled up his horse near the bridge, with a
"At boss zides, Captain," he heard the voice of the colonel, who, having

and fell on his hands. The others outstripped him.
looking at the ground, he came on some sticky, trodden mud, stumbled,
trying only to be ahead of the others; but just at the bridge, not
Rostov did not think what this call for stretchers meant; he ran on,

"Stretchers!" shouted someone behind him.

and their sabers clattering.
saw nothing but the hussars running all around him, their spurs catching
thud. Denisov rode past him, leaning back and shouting something. Rostov
an orderly's charge, and he felt the blood rush to his heart with a
that his heart stood still. His hand trembled as he gave his horse into
no time. He was afraid of falling behind the hussars, so much afraid
were crossing themselves. Rostov no longer looked at the colonel, he had
hussars hastily dismounted, not knowing what they were to do. The men
Their sabers catching in the bridles and their spurs jingling, the

"Look sharp! Look sharp!" several voices repeated around him.

command.
he always did when at the front, solemn and stern. Then came the word of
conjecture, but the colonel did not once glance at Rostov, and looked as
the colonel, closely--to find in his face confirmation of his own
appeared that they had worn when under fire. Rostov watched his enemy,
Again on all the bright faces of the squadron the serious expression

him see whether I am a coward!" he thought.
test me!" His heart contracted and the blood rushed to his face. "Let
"There, it's just as I thought," said Rostov to himself. "He wishes to

the bridge.
squadron, that in which Rostov was serving under Denisov, to return to
for everything, the colonel moved forward and ordered the second
Striking his horse with his long muscular legs as if it were to blame

do the right thing.
that in spite of all the unpleasantness he had to endure he would still
"I will the bridge fire," he said in a solemn tone as if to announce

staff officer, and at Zherkov, and he frowned.
The colonel looked silently at the officer of the suite, at the stout

the enemy will bring up his guns to use grapeshot."
"Colonel," interrupted the officer of the suite, "You must be quick or

offended tone.
"You were saying, Mr. Staff Officer..." continued the colonel in an

"On the same business. But you are damp! Let me wring you out!"

"How did you get here?" said he, turning to Zherkov.
"Ah, that's always the way!" said Nesvitski with a wave of the hand.

could not know by the holy spirit!"
to obey. You said the bridge would be burned, but who would it burn, I
burn the bridge! I know the service, and it is my habit orders strictly
"I am not your 'dear sir,' Mr. Staff Officer, and you did not tell me to

in position?"
telling you to fire the bridge, when inflammable material had been put
smoothing his hair wet with perspiration with his plump hand, "wasn't I
"But, my dear sir," said Nesvitski as he drew up, taking off his cap and

nothing about firing it."
"You spoke to me of inflammable material," said he, "but you said

The colonel deliberately stopped the regiment and turned to Nesvitski.

themselves over there and one can't make anything out."
the bridge, and now someone has gone and blundered; they are all beside
"How's this, Colonel?" he shouted as he approached. "I told you to fire

weight.
came galloping up on a Cossack horse that could scarcely carry his
colonel of hussars with the same order. After him the stout Nesvitski
Zherkov was followed by an officer of the suite who rode up to the

must return quickly and fire the bridge.'"
"but the prince told me to 'go and tell the colonel that the hussars
"I don't myself know 'to who,'" replied the cornet in a serious tone,

"An order to who?" asked the colonel morosely.

and fire the bridge."
gravity and glancing round at his comrades, "there is an order to stop
"Colonel," he said, addressing Rostov's enemy with an air of gloomy

to his former chief with an order from the commander of the rear guard.
attaching himself as an orderly officer to Prince Bagration. He now came
more rewards by doing nothing on the staff, and had succeeded in
saying he was not such a fool as to slave at the front when he could get
dismissal from headquarters Zherkov had not remained in the regiment,
had but recently left their regiment, rode up to the colonel. After his
The high-shouldered figure of Zherkov, familiar to the Pavlograds as he

extend the hand of reconciliation.
Bogdanich would come up to him as he lay wounded and would magnanimously
just to punish him--Rostov. Then he imagined how, after the attack,
he thought that his enemy would send the squadron on a desperate attack
him that Bogdanich rode so near in order to show him his courage. Next
so he drew himself up and looked around him merrily; then it seemed to
notice him, and that his whole aim now was to test the cadet's courage,
neck. It seemed to Rostov that Bogdanich was only pretending not to
colonel's athletic back, his nape covered with light hair, and his red
admitted that he had been to blame, did not lift his eyes from the
that he was at the front and in the power of a man toward whom he now
first time since their encounter concerning Telyanin. Rostov, feeling
without taking any notice of him although they were now meeting for the
up to Denisov's squadron and rode at a footpace not far from Rostov,
hill one after the other. Their colonel, Karl Bogdanich Schubert, came
The two Pavlograd squadrons, having crossed the bridge, retired up the

of the river.
line followed them across and the last Cossacks quitted the farther side
having lost a single man. The second squadron that had been in the front
The squadron crossed the bridge and drew out of range of fire without

back."
here? Don't you see the skirmishers are retreating? Lead the squadron
face as if driving off a troublesome fly. "And why are you stopping
"Attack indeed!" said the colonel in a bored voice, puckering up his

"Your excellency! Let us attack them! I'll dwive them off."

galloped up to him.
perfectly happy. Just then the commander appeared on the bridge. Denisov
And he smiled approvingly, evidently pleased with the cadet. Rostov felt

last."
Wostov," he cried noticing the cadet's bright face, "you've got it at
"The devil only knows what they're about!" muttered Denisov. "Ah,

You'll see--we shall retire."
"Well, what about it?" said he to Denisov. "It won't come to a fight.

eyes were brighter than usual.
him. His face with its long mustache was serious as always, only his
staff captain on his broad-backed, steady mare came at a walk to meet
voice to the men to look to their pistols. He rode up to Kirsten. The
he galloped to the other flank of the squadron and shouted in a hoarse
horse, Bedouin, and sitting as though falling backwards in the saddle,
they drink, pressing his spurs mercilessly into the sides of his good
only redder than usual. With his shaggy head thrown back like birds when
especially toward evening when he had emptied his second bottle; he was
held the hilt of his naked saber, looked just as it usually did,
sturdy figure with the sinewy hairy hand and stumpy fingers in which he
The black, hairy, snub-nosed face of Vaska Denisov, and his whole short

his horse in front of the squadron.
me," cried Denisov who, unable to keep still on one spot, kept turning
"Who's that curtseying there? Cadet Miwonov! That's not wight! Look at

something new and stern showed round the mouth.
under fire. But despite himself, on his face too that same indication of
clear, bright expression, as if asking them to notice how calmly he sat
sure he will distinguish himself. He was glancing at everyone with a
called up before a large audience for an examination in which he feels
handsome horse despite its game leg--had the happy air of a schoolboy
time a ball flew past. Rostov on the left flank, mounted on his Rook--a
soldiers as if threatening to punish them. Cadet Mironov ducked every
around chin and mouth. The quartermaster frowned, looking at the
showed one common expression of conflict, irritation, and excitement,
comrades' impression. Every face, from Denisov's to that of the bugler,
without turning their heads glanced at one another, curious to see their
ball flew past, rose in the stirrups and sank back again. The soldiers
rows of faces so alike yet so different, holding its breath while the
of each shot, as at the word of command, the whole squadron with its
somewhere beyond them. The hussars did not look round, but at the sound
with rapid rhythmic whistle flew over the heads of the horsemen and fell
ball flew past. Evidently they were firing at the hussars, but the balls
commander, awaiting the word of command. A second and a third cannon
squadron. All were looking at the enemy in front and at the squadron
hussars began carefully aligning their horses. Silence fell on the whole
officers who had been standing together rode off to their places. The
a ball flew whistling over the heads of the hussar squadron. The
On the high ground where the enemy was, the smoke of a cannon rose, and

takes place at such moments.
particular glamour and glad keenness of impression to everything that
anyone who comes in sight of the enemy, and that feeling gives a
excitedly animated and healthy men." So thinks, or at any rate feels,
strong, healthy, cheerful, and excited, and are surrounded by other such
inevitably have to learn what lies the other side of death. But you are
be crossed and you will have to find out what is there, just as you will
and yet long to cross that line, and know that sooner or later it must
roof lit up by the sun? No one knows, but one wants to know. You fear
what is there? Who is there?--there beyond that field, that tree, that
the living from the dead lies uncertainty, suffering, and death. And
"One step beyond that boundary line which resembles the line dividing

two hostile armies was all the more clearly felt.
stern, threatening, inaccessible, and intangible line which separates
yards was all that separated them. The enemy ceased firing, and that
except a few scattered skirmishers. An empty space of some seven hundred
from the hill. There was no one now between the squadron and the enemy
intervals the bugle calls and the shouts of the enemy could be heard
upon the Danube and the dark hills around it. It was calm, and at
weather had cleared again since noon and the sun was descending brightly
appearing on the skyline, which they knew to be the enemy's troops. The
there on the hilltop, and kept constantly looking at the patches
other things and to look in other directions, thought only of what was
the officers and men of Denisov's squadron, though they tried to talk of
French. A group of Cossack scouts retired down the hill at a trot. All
ground, artillery and troops in blue uniform were seen. These were the
Cossack scouts were moving. Suddenly on the road at the top of the high
the foot of the hill lay wasteland over which a few groups of our
river flowed was formed by the rising ground only half a mile away. At
the bridge, for the horizon as seen from the valley through which the
be seen from the hill on the opposite bank but was not yet visible from
remained on the farther side of the bridge facing the enemy, who could
battalion came onto the bridge. Only Denisov's squadron of hussars
the baggage wagons had all crossed, the crush was less, and the last
together as they approached it as if passing through a funnel. At last
The last of the infantry hurriedly crossed the bridge, squeezing

CHAPTER VIII




hussar shouted back.
"Take a stick between your legs, that'll suit you for a horse!" the

weight of his knapsack.
said a corporal, chaffing a thin little soldier who bent under the
"There now, Zikin, they ought to put you on a horse. You'd look fine,"

than a man."
off his face with his sleeve. "Perched up there, you're more like a bird
cords would soon get a bit rubbed," said an infantryman, wiping the mud
"I'd like to put you on a two days' march with a knapsack! Your fine

horse had splashed mud over some foot soldiers.
"Don't kick up the dust, you infantry!" jested an hussar whose prancing

"What good are they? They're led about just for show!" remarked another.

"Smart lads! Only fit for a fair!" said one.

regular order.
encounter one another at the clean, smart hussars who moved past them in
estrangement, and ridicule with which troops of different arms usually
trampled mud and gazed with that particular feeling of ill-will,
The infantry who had been stopped crowded near the bridge in the

on his side of it.
front and men four abreast, spread across the bridge and began to emerge
resounded on the planks of the bridge, and the squadron, officers in
nearer. Then the clang of hoofs, as of several horses galloping,
ground, eager to rejoin its fellows, he watched his squadron draw
Carelessly holding in his stallion that was neighing and pawing the
Having cleared the way Denisov stopped at the end of the bridge.

and having done this he rode back.
bridge Nesvitski found the colonel to whom he had to deliver the order,
the farther side of the bridge and stopped the infantry. Beside the
frantically, had such an effect that they managed to squeeze through to
determination of Denisov who flourished his sword and shouted
The imposing figure of Nesvitski followed by his Cossack, and the

scented myself."
"Of course. I'm going into action! I've shaved, bwushed my teeth, and

a smell of perfume, and put it to Nesvitski's nose.
Denisov smiled, took out of his sabretache a handkerchief that diffused

cloak and saddlecloth.
"What a dandy you are today!" said Nesvitski, looking at Denisov's new

let's fight. But the devil knows what this is."
keep dwagging the wegiment to and fwo all day. If they mean to fight,
"They don't even give one time to dwink!" answered Vaska Denisov. "They

ridden up to him.
"How's it you're not drunk today?" said Nesvitski when the other had

Denisov joined Nesvitski.
The soldiers crowded against one another with terrified faces, and

flourishing it.
saber!" he shouted, actually drawing his saber from its scabbard and
pass!... Stop there, you devil with the cart! I'll hack you with my
is this? They're like sheep! Just like sheep! Out of the way!... Let us
apparently ready to jump over the railings had his rider let him. "What
from his bit, tramping the planks of the bridge with his hoofs, and
its ears as the bayonets touched it, and snorted, spurting white foam
teeth fiercely and spurring his black thoroughbred Arab, which twitched
"The squadwon can't pass," shouted Vaska Denisov, showing his white

"Ah, Vaska!" joyfully replied Nesvitski. "What's up with you?"

bare hand as red as his face.
whites glittering and rolling as he waved his sheathed saber in a small
evidently in a fit of rage, his coal-black eyes with their bloodshot
"Tell these devils, these fiends, to let me pass!" shouted Denisov

his shoulder.
his cap on the back of his black head and a cloak hanging jauntily over
the living mass of moving infantry, Vaska Denisov, red and shaggy, with
Nesvitski looked round and saw, some fifteen paces away but separated by

him.
"Nesvitski, Nesvitski! you numskull!" came a hoarse voice from behind

harder from behind.
nearest him were not to blame for they were themselves pressed still
for him, but again pressed on him so that they jammed his leg, and those
continually he moved on. The soldiers squeezed themselves to make way
With great difficulty he managed to get to his horse, and shouting

way! Make way!"
"Hey, Cossack, my horse!" he said. "Now, then, you there! get out of the

The crowd moved on again. Nesvitski realized that it was a cannon ball.

"Encouraging us to get along quicker," said another uneasily.

round at the sound.
"Just see where it carries to!" a soldier near by said sternly, looking

something big, that splashed into the water.
suddenly heard a sound new to him, of something swiftly approaching...
Looking down at the waters of the Enns under the bridge, Nesvitski

another, and all pressed toward the exit from the bridge.
different voices were saying in the crowd, as the men looked at one
worse if he fires the bridge. See, here's an officer jammed in too"--
"Where are you shoving to? Devil take you! Can't you wait? It'll be
"And why are they stopping? There's no proper order!" said the soldiers.

crowd had to wait.
convoy wagon became restive at the end of the bridge, and the whole
kind of talk, and at last all stopped. As often happens, the horses of a
they had gone by, the same stream of soldiers followed, with the same
bridge did not take his eyes off the women till they had passed. When
The girl smiled and took it. Nesvitski like the rest of the men on the

"Take it if you like," said the officer, giving the girl an apple.

The German closed his eyes, signifying that he did not understand.

apple, also half smiling as he looked at the handsome girl.
"Where are you going?" asked an infantry officer who was eating an

"I have seen as much before now, mate!"

"There, Fedotov, you should be quartered on them!"

"See how smart she's made herself! Oh, the devils!"

angry and frightened, strode energetically along with downcast eyes.
"Sell me the missis," said another soldier, addressing the German, who,

"Just see, the German sausage is making tracks, too!"

almost the same smile, expressing unseemly thoughts about the women.
all the soldiers' remarks related to the two young ones. Every face bore
turned toward the women, and while the vehicle was passing at foot pace
allowed to pass by special permission. The eyes of all the soldiers
were sitting on some feather beds. Evidently these fugitives were
baby, an old woman, and a healthy German girl with bright red cheeks
a large udder was attached to the cart behind. A woman with an unweaned
seemed loaded with a whole houseful of effects. A fine brindled cow with
before. It was a German cart with a pair of horses led by a German, and
That one also passed. Then followed a cart unlike any that had gone

bragging of having been frightened.
of fright. I did, 'pon my word, I got that frightened!" said he, as if
an enormous mouth, hardly refraining from laughing, "I felt like dying
"As it flies past me, Daddy, the ball I mean," said a young soldier with

be killed," a sergeant was saying angrily and reproachfully.
"Bah! How they scurry. He just sends a ball and they think they'll all

struck on the teeth, or what the ham had to do with it.
And they, too, passed on, so that Nesvitski did not learn who had been
"Yes, the ham was just delicious..." answered another with a loud laugh.

with a wide swing of his arm.
of his gun..." a soldier whose greatcoat was well tucked up said gaily,
"And then, old fellow, he gives him one in the teeth with the butt end

had evidently been drinking.
And he also passed on with the wagon. Then came some merry soldiers who

running behind the cart and fumbling in the back of it.
"Where the devil have the leg bands been shoved to?" said an orderly,

That soldier passed on, and after him came another sitting on a cart.

yourself."
the old soldier dismally to a comrade, "you'll forget to scratch
"If he" (he meant the enemy) "begins popping at the bridge now," said

a wink, and passed on followed by another, an old man.
"A million all but one!" replied a waggish soldier in a torn coat, with

many more of you to come?"
"It's as if a dam had burst," said the Cossack hopelessly. "Are there

moved across the bridge.
baggage wagon, piled high, leather covered, and hemmed in on all sides,
sometimes like a log floating down the river, an officers' or company's
an orderly, or a townsman was carried through the waves of infantry; and
sometimes like a chip of wood whirling in the river, an hussar on foot,
type of face different from that of the men, squeezed his way along;
white foam on the waves of the Enns, an officer, in a cloak and with a
bridge. Sometimes through the monotonous waves of men, like a fleck of
feet that moved through the sticky mud that covered the planks of the
broad cheekbones, sunken cheeks, and listless tired expressions, and
knapsacks, bayonets, long muskets, and, under the shakos, faces with
uniform living waves of soldiers, shoulder straps, covered shakos,
the bridge chased each other along. Looking on the bridge he saw equally
little waves of the Enns, which rippling and eddying round the piles of
mass. Looking down over the rails Prince Nesvitski saw the rapid, noisy
shoulder, their bayonets interlocking, moved over the bridge in a dense
left! Wait a bit." But the soldiers, crowded together shoulder to
the soldiers who were blocking his way. "Hi there, boys! Keep to the
But the convoyman took no notice of the word "general" and shouted at

can't wait a moment! Don't you see the general wants to pass?"
crowded together close to his wheels and his horses. "What a fellow! You
soldier with a wagon, who was pressing onto the infantrymen who were
"What a fine fellow you are, friend!" said the Cossack to a convoy

pressed him against the railings, and all he could do was to smile.
Nesvitski tried to move on, soldiers and carts pushed him back again and
behind him holding two horses by their bridles. Each time Prince
railings. He looked back laughing to the Cossack who stood a few steps
alighted from his horse and whose big body was jammed against the
there was a crush. Halfway across stood Prince Nesvitski, who had
Two of the enemy's shots had already flown across the bridge, where

CHAPTER VII




spirited impression.
the brilliance of the bright sunshine merged in a single joyous and
out from behind the clouds, and the clear sound of the solitary shot and
approaching enemy farther off. At the same instant the sun came fully
visible as if but a stone's throw away, and the movements of the
up and began watching the movements of our troops below, as plainly
The faces of officers and men brightened up at the sound. Everyone got

showing the spot where it burst.
troops below the hill and fell far short of the enemy, a little smoke
metallic roar, and a whistling grenade flew above the heads of our
Number one jumped briskly aside. The gun rang out with a deafening

"One!" came the command.

loading.
In a moment the men came running gaily from their campfires and began

"Crew, to your guns!" commanded the officer.

time."
general, turning to an artillery officer. "Have a little fun to pass the
"Now then, let's see how far it will carry, Captain. Just try!" said the

him smilingly, and he rode off by the winding path down the hill.
"I'll really call in on the nuns," he said to the officers who watched

and flask, and swung his heavy person easily into the saddle.
He called the Cossack with his horse, told him to put away the knapsack

"Very good," answered Nesvitski.

inflammable material on the bridge must be reinspected."
are to cross last and to fire the bridge as I ordered; and the
had already once been given in detail: "and tell the hussars that they
"Yes, please do," answered the general, and he repeated the order that

"Hadn't I better ride over, your excellency?" asked Nesvitski.

have been wasting time."
"It's a bad business," said the general without answering him, "our men

"Would not your excellency like a little refreshment?" he said.

Nesvitski rose, puffing, and went up to the general, smiling.

a shot, and our troops could be seen hurrying to the crossing.
their battery a milk-white cloud arose. Then came the distant report of
On the opposite side the enemy could be seen by the naked eye, and from

crossing. And why are they dawdling there?"
glass and shrugging his shoulders, "so it is! They'll be fired on at the
"Yes, so it is, so it is," said the general angrily, lowering the field

the general, who looked through his field glass.
Meanwhile the staff officer standing in front pointed out something to

laughing.
"They must be feeling dull, too," said one of the bolder officers,

them. On my word I'd give five years of my life for it!"
"Just to flutter the nuns a bit. They say there are Italian girls among

The officers laughed.

"That would be fine, gentlemen!"

gleamed.
He pointed with a smile to a turreted nunnery, and his eyes narrowed and

over there."
munching a pie in his moist-lipped handsome mouth, "would be to slip in
"So they will," said Nesvitski. "No, but what I should like," added he,

They'll ransack that castle," he remarked with evident approval.
the meadow behind the village, three of them are dragging something.
countryside--"See, our infantrymen have already got there. Look there in
another pie but felt shy, and therefore pretended to be examining the
"Look, Prince," said another, who would have dearly liked to take

house!"
We passed close to the park and saw two deer... and what a splendid
be talking to a staff officer of such importance. "It's a lovely place!
"Thank you very much, Prince," answered one of the officers, pleased to

saying.
place! Why are you not eating anything, gentlemen?" Nesvitski was
"Yes, the Austrian prince who built that castle was no fool. It's a fine

knees, some squatting Turkish fashion on the wet grass.
doppelkummel. The officers gladly gathered round him, some on their
flask, and Nesvitski was treating some officers to pies and real
carriage. A Cossack who accompanied him had handed him a knapsack and a
rearguard by the commander-in-chief, was sitting on the trail of a gun
his fieldglass. A little behind them Nesvitski, who had been sent to the
the rearguard stood with a staff officer, scanning the country through
Among the field guns on the brow of the hill the general in command of

enemy's horse patrols could be discerned.
wild virgin pine forest, and far away on the other side of the Enns the
treetops and bluish gorges. The turrets of a convent stood out beyond a
Danube covered with pine forests, with a mystic background of green
the Enns and the Danube became visible, and the rocky left bank of the
and a castle with a park surrounded by the waters of the confluence of
masses of Russian troops. At the bend of the Danube, vessels, an island,
cathedral, and its bridge, on both sides of which streamed jostling
little town could be seen with its white, red-roofed houses, its
clearly seen glittering as though freshly varnished. Down below, the
then, suddenly spread out in the sunlight, far-distant objects could be
bridge was at times veiled by a diaphanous curtain of slanting rain, and
before the heights on which the Russian batteries stood guarding the
It was a warm, rainy, autumnal day. The wide expanse that opened out

through the town of Enns on both sides of the bridge.
baggage train, the artillery, and columns of troops were defiling
Russian troops were crossing the river Enns. At midday the Russian
the rivers Inn (at Braunau) and Traun (near Linz). On October 23 the
Kutuzov fell back toward Vienna, destroying behind him the bridges over

CHAPTER VI




"Well, thank God! We've been sitting here too long!"

"We're going into action, gentlemen!"

Zherkov. They were under orders to advance next day.
The regimental adjutant came in and confirmed the news brought by

"Oh, my dear fellow, we're in such a stew here these last two days."

of a hot bath."
arrival... What's the matter, Rostov? You look as if you'd just come out
An Austrian general complained of me. I congratulated him on Mack's
"I've been sent back to the regiment all on account of that devil, Mack.

you come here?"
"Into action! Into action! Bring him a bottle for such news! But how did

"What? Saw the real Mack? With hands and feet?"

"I've seen him myself!"

"It's not true!"

army."
"We're to go into action, gentlemen! Mack has surrendered with his whole

"What brings you here?" cried the officers turning to the newcomer.

Just then Zherkov entered the room.

Denisov in a bloodthirsty tone.
"Illness or not, he'd better not cwoss my path. I'd kill him!" shouted

staff captain.
"It is an illness, there's no other way of explaining it," said the

muttered Denisov.
"He has weported himself sick, he's to be stwuck off the list tomowwow,"

of that scoundrel?" he asked Denisov.
"Well, it's as you like," said the staff captain. "And what has become

can't..."
"No, on my word it's not obstinacy! I can't describe the feeling. I

obstinacy," said Kirsten.
"It'll be worse for you. Bogdanich is vindictive and you'll pay for your

Denisov began to laugh.

forgiveness?"
what you will! How can I go and apologize like a little boy asking
Rostov in an imploring voice, "but I can't apologize, by God I can't, do
"Gentlemen, I'll do anything. No one shall hear a word from me," said

apologize, your excellency. Yes, go!"
Rostov by his title, as if in recognition of his confession. "Go and
"That's better, Count," said the staff captain, beginning to address

"I tell you," shouted Denisov, "he's a fine fellow."

clapping Rostov on the shoulder with his big hand.
"Come, that's right, Count!" cried the staff captain, turning round and

round. Well, what else do you want?..."
of the flag... Well, never mind, it's true I'm to blame, to blame all
regiment I'd... Ah well, I'll show that in action, and for me the honor
wrong to think that of me... I... for me... for the honor of the
"No, gentlemen, no... you mustn't think... I quite understand. You're

and then at the other.
Rostov, growing red and pale alternately, looked first at one officer

Wostov, now then!"
"That's twue, devil take it!" shouted Denisov, jumping up. "Now then,


And the staff captain rose and turned away from Rostov.

always stick to mother truth. It's not right!"
all this is not right, it's not right! You may take offense or not but I
regiment, and Bogdanich knows it. Oh, we do prize it, old fellow! And
willing, are going to die in the regiment, we prize the honor of the
staff captain, "but we old fellows, who have grown up in and, God
"You value your own pride and don't wish to apologize," continued the

his glittering black eyes at Rostov.
Denisov remained silent and did not move, but occasionally looked with

Am I not right, Denisov? It's not the same!"
thieves among the Pavlograd officers!' But it's not all the same to us!
adjutant somewhere and can snap your fingers when it is said 'There are
no time, my lad, you're here today and tomorrow you'll be appointed
captain's voice began to tremble. "You have been in the regiment next to
offense, but you don't mind disgracing the whole regiment!" The staff
anyway he is an honorable and brave old colonel! You're quick at taking
apologize to an old and honorable officer? Whatever Bogdanich may be,
public. You are offended at being put on duty a bit, but why not
conceit prevents your apologizing, and you wish to make the whole affair
yourself in it. And now, when one wants to smooth the thing over, some
It's not pleasant, but what's to be done, my dear fellow? You landed
Bogdanich was a brick: he told you you were saying what was not true.
scoundrel? Is that how you look at it? We don't see it like that. And
disgrace the whole regiment? Disgrace the whole regiment because of one
officers. Now what was the colonel to do? Have the officer tried and
advice; but no, you go and blurt it all straight out before the
case is this: you ought to have thought the matter over and taken
but to the whole regiment--all of us--you're to blame all round. The
severely. "You don't wish to apologize, but, man, it's not only to him
"I did not expect this of you," said the staff captain seriously and

"Not on any account!" exclaimed Rostov.

apologize."
"Well, have it so, and you talked a lot of nonsense to him and must

"He did not shut me up, he said I was telling an untruth."

called Bogdanich) "shuts you up."
officers," continued the staff captain, "and Bogdanich" (the colonel was
"You speak to the colonel about this nasty business before other

staff captain's question by a disapproving shake of his head.
conversation, evidently with no wish to take part in it. He answered the
Denisov sat gloomily biting his mustache and listening to the

satisfaction of his regimental commander?"
Ask Denisov whether it is not out of the question for a cadet to demand
"That's all right. No one thinks you a coward, but that's not the point.

me satisfaction..."
would not need finesse; and he tells me that I am lying--so let him give
diplomatist. That's why I joined the hussars, thinking that here one
officers. Perhaps I ought not to have spoken before them, but I am not a
"I'm not to blame that the conversation began in the presence of other

stolen..."
tell the colonel in the presence of other officers that an officer has
staff captain in his deep bass, calmly stroking his long mustache. "You
"You just wait a moment, my dear fellow, and listen," interrupted the

beneath his dignity to give me satisfaction, then..."
apologize, because if he, as commander of this regiment, thinks it
every day, or may place me under arrest, but no one can make me
lied, and I told him he lied. And there it rests. He may keep me on duty
"I will allow no one to call me a liar!" cried Rostov. "He told me I

affairs of honor and had twice regained his commission.
The staff captain, Kirsten, had twice been reduced to the ranks for

excitement.
wrinkles on his large features, to Rostov who was crimson with
tall, grizzly-haired staff captain, with enormous mustaches and many
"And I tell you, Rostov, that you must apologize to the colonel!" said a

officers in Denisov's quarters.
That same evening there was an animated discussion among the squadron's

CHAPTER V




money," and he threw the purse to him and ran out of the inn.
"Don't touch me," said Rostov, drawing back. "If you need it, take the

"Count..." said Telyanin drawing nearer to him.

steps. "O God," he said with tears in his eyes, "how could you do it?"
room without a word. But at the door he stopped and then retraced his
Rostov took the money, avoiding Telyanin's eyes, and went out of the

mother!..."
take it..." He threw it on the table. "I have an old father and
"Count!... Don't ruin a young fellow... here is this wretched money,

to Rostov's face, and his sobs were audible.
eyes still shifted from side to side but with a downward look not rising
Every muscle of Telyanin's pale, terrified face began to quiver, his

"I..."

"I know it and shall prove it," said Rostov.

explanation..."
taking up his cap and moving toward a small empty room. "We must have an
"Heaven only knows what the people here may imagine," muttered Telyanin,

completed.
miserable man who stood before him, but the task he had begun had to be
from him. He was glad, and at the same instant began to pity the
pardon. As soon as Rostov heard them, an enormous load of doubt fell
But these words came like a piteous, despairing cry and an entreaty for

"What? What? How dare you? What?" said Telyanin.

whispered just above Telyanin's ear.
dragging him to the window. "That money is Denisov's; you took it..." he
"Come here," said Rostov, catching hold of Telyanin's arm and almost

and back, and back again and again in an instant.
Some flash as of an electric spark shot from Telyanin's eyes to Rostov's

he glanced into Rostov's eyes.
"Well, young man?" he said with a sigh, and from under his lifted brows

pocket and that's quite simple and is no one else's business."
slightly open, as if to say, "Yes, yes, I am putting my purse in my
pocket of his riding breeches, with his eyebrows lifted and his mouth
it. Telyanin took the purse and began carelessly slipping it into the
He stretched out his hand to take hold of the purse. Rostov let go of

here," continued Telyanin. "Now then, let me have it."
"And you? Are you going to have lunch too? They feed you quite decently

Rostov did not speak.

it, young man, I'm going."
little towns there's nowhere to spend it," said he. "Well, let me have
"If we get to Vienna I'll get rid of it there but in these wretched

and suddenly seemed to grow very merry.
looked at Telyanin. The lieutenant was looking about in his usual way
Rostov took the purse in his hand, examined it and the money in it, and

added, "Look at it, young man."
"Yes, it's a nice purse. Yes, yes," he said, growing suddenly pale, and

purse.
With shifting eyes but eyebrows still raised, Telyanin handed him the

voice.
"Allow me to look at your purse," he said in a low, almost inaudible,

The coin was a new one. Rostov rose and went up to Telyanin.

"Please be quick," he said.

the waiter.
fingers, drew out a gold imperial, and lifting his eyebrows gave it to
purse and, drawing its rings aside with his small, white, turned-up
When Telyanin had finished his lunch he took out of his pocket a double

and the munching of the lieutenant.
room. No one spoke and the only sounds heard were the clatter of knives
Both were silent. There were two Germans and a Russian officer in the

he sat down at the nearest table.
"Yes," said Rostov as if it cost him a great deal to utter the word; and

eyebrows.
"Ah, you've come here too, young man!" he said, smiling and raising his

sausages and a bottle of wine.
In the second room of the inn the lieutenant was sitting over a dish of

it and saw Telyanin's horse at the porch.
an inn in the village which the officers frequented. Rostov rode up to
Rostov, without returning home, took a horse and rode there. There was
The headquarters were situated two miles away from Salzeneck, and

"You've only just missed him," said the orderly.

"No, nothing."

troubled face.
orderly. "Has something happened?" he added, surprised at the cadet's
"The master is not in, he's gone to headquarters," said Telyanin's

Rostov went to Telyanin's quarters.

heard.
"Ah, may the devil take you and evewybody," were the last words Rostov

He could not finish, and ran out of the room.

so, then..."
"There was no one else in the room except myself. So that if it is not
"Do you understand what you're saying?" he said in a trembling voice.

were his worst enemy, firmly fixed his eyes directly on his face.
But Rostov pulled away his arm and, with as much anger as though Denisov

the cadet to restrain him.
"And I tell you, don't you dahe to do it!" shouted Denisov, rushing at

went to the door.
"I know who has taken it," repeated Rostov in an unsteady voice, and

here! I'll flay this scoundwel alive, and it will be found."
like cords. "You are mad, I tell you. I won't allow it. The purse is
"Nonsense!" he cried, and the veins on his forehead and neck stood out

arm.
moment, and, evidently understanding what Rostov hinted at, seized his
toward the door without raising his eyes. Denisov paused, thought a
"Denisov, let him alone, I know who has taken it," said Rostov, going

orderly by the shoulders and knocking him against the wall.
"I must have that purse, I tell you," shouted Denisov, shaking his

his saber, and put on his cap.
Rostov, his eyes avoiding Denisov, began buttoning his coat, buckled on

you all."
threatening gesture. "If the purse isn't found I'll flog you, I'll flog
Denisov, suddenly, turning purple and rushing at the man with a
"Now then, you devil's puppet, look alive and hunt for it!" shouted

yourselves. It must be here somewhere," said Lavrushka.
"And there hasn't been anyone in the room except the lieutenant and

below his throat rushed to his face and eyes. He could not draw breath.
dropped them again. All the blood which had seemed congested somewhere
Rostov felt Denisov's gaze fixed on him, raised his eyes, and instantly

"Wostov, you've not been playing schoolboy twicks..."

Denisov glanced at Rostov.
latter threw up his arms in surprise saying it was nowhere to be found
room. Denisov silently watched Lavrushka's movements, and when the
the table, searched everywhere, and stood still in the middle of the
Lavrushka turned all the bedding over, looked under the bed and under

remember putting it there."
"No, if I hadn't thought of it being a treasure," said Rostov, "but I

Feel in your pockets."
"You're always like that; you thwow a thing down anywhere and forget it.

"But it isn't?..."

"I haven't been in the room. It must be where you put it."

Where is it?" he asked, turning to Lavrushka.
under your head like a treasure," said Rostov. "I put it just here.
"Dear me, can I have forgotten? No, I remember thinking that you kept it

He pulled off the quilt and shook it. The purse was not there.

at a time and shaking them.
"Wait, haven't you dropped it?" said Rostov, picking up the pillows one

"That's a miwacle."

Denisov threw both pillows on the floor. The purse was not there.

"It's not there."

"Under the lower pillow."

"Where have you put it, Wostov?"

And Denisov went to the bed to get the purse from under the pillow.

"No, I tell you."

me. Really I have some," Rostov repeated.
"But if you won't accept money from me like a comrade, you will offend

"Don't like bowwowing from my own fellows, I don't," growled Denisov.

Rostov, blushing.
"Please, Denisov, let me lend you some: I have some, you know," said

Call the quahtehmasteh," he shouted to Lavrushka.
"Oh, it's wetched! Well, what are you standing there for, you sca'cwow?

"Seven new and three old imperials."

puhse?" he asked, turning to Rostov.
"Wetched business," he muttered to himself. "How much is left in the

Denisov frowned and was about to shout some reply but stopped.

for the money."
"Who should it be? You yourself told him to come. It's the quartermaster

least abashed.
devil, I'm busy!" he shouted to Lavrushka, who went up to him not in the
pua' as on the first day of cweation... Who's that now? Send him to the
childwen of the dust... but one falls in love and one is a God, one is
"You see, my fwiend," he said, "we sleep when we don't love. We are

write, told Rostov the contents of his letter.
evidently glad of a chance to say quicker in words what he wanted to
He leaned his elbows on the table with his pen in his hand and,

her."
paper. He looked gloomily in Rostov's face and said: "I am witing to
table. Denisov was sitting there scratching with his pen on a sheet of
When Rostov went back there was a bottle of vodka and a sausage on the

explained how to rivet the hoof and went away to his own quarters.
They went through the porch and into the stable. The lieutenant

"I want to teach this young man how to shoe a horse," said Telyanin.

"Not yet. But where are you off to?"

order. Have you got it, Denisov?"
"Let us go ourselves. I only came round to ask Denisov about yesterday's

"I have."

looking carelessly about him.
"Have you told them to bring the horse?" asked Telyanin, getting up and

entered.
"Well there certainly are disgusting people," thought Rostov as he

him, rubbing his small white hands.
Telyanin was sitting in the same indolent pose in which Rostov had left

one to do?" and, having given his order, he returned to Telyanin.
Rostov shrugged his shoulders as much as to say: "Nor do I, but what's

quartermaster's presence.
"Ugh! I don't like that fellow," he said, regardless of the

shudder of disgust.
thumb to the room where Telyanin was sitting, he frowned and gave a
Denisov screwed up his face and pointing over his shoulder with his
facing the quartermaster who was reporting to him. On seeing Rostov,
In the passage Denisov, with a pipe, was squatting on the threshold

Telyanin, and he went out to give the order.
"Then I'll have it brought round," said Rostov wishing to avoid

you'll thank me for."
"I'll show you, I'll show you! It's not a secret. And it's a horse

"Yes, please do," said Rostov.

you what kind of rivet to use."
"The hoof's cracked! That's nothing. I'll teach you what to do and show

"He's begun to go a little lame on the left foreleg," he added.
for which he had paid seven hundred rubbles was not worth half that sum.
"Oh, he's all right, a good horse," answered Rostov, though the horse

"I saw you riding this morning..." he added.

face; his eyes continually wandered from one object to another.
The lieutenant never looked the man he was speaking to straight in the

young horse Telyanin had sold to Rostov.)
"Well, young cavalryman, how is my Rook behaving?" he asked. (Rook was a

unable to overcome or conceal his groundless antipathy to the man.
regiment but was not liked; Rostov especially detested him and was
from the Guards just before this campaign. He behaved very well in the
which was offered him. Telyanin for some reason had been transferred
Rostov thrust the purse under the pillow and shook the damp little hand

the room.
and Lieutenant Telyanin, a small officer of the same squadron, entered
"Where? At Bykov's, at the rat's... I knew it," replied a piping voice,

voice from the next room.
"Ah! Telyanin! How d'ye do? They plucked me last night," came Denisov's

in separate piles, began counting them.
Rostov took the money and, mechanically arranging the old and new coins

purse undah the pillow," he said, and went out to the quartermaster.
"Wostov, deah fellow, just see how much there is left and shove the
"Wetched!" he muttered, throwing down a purse with some gold in it.

Denisov's face puckered still more.

"The squadron quartermaster!" said Lavrushka.

clinking of spurs that came to a stop, and a respectful cough.
he said, turning to the door as he heard a tread of heavy boots and the
but dwink. If we could only get to fighting soon. Hullo, who's there?"
"If at least we had some women here; but there's nothing foh one to do

with his glittering, black eyes at Rostov.
Then he remained silent for a while, and all at once looked cheerfully
He scattered the burning tobacco, smashed the pipe, and threw it away.

gives the singles and snatches the doubles!"
"He lets one win the singles and collahs it as soon as one doubles it;

continued to shout.
fist, and tapped it on the floor, making the sparks fly, while he
He took the lighted pipe that was offered to him, gripped it in his

"Just fancy, he didn't let me win a single cahd, not one cahd."
rat") he said, rubbing his forehead and whole face with both hands.
"And what devil made me go to that wat?" (an officer nicknamed "the

tangled black hair.
teeth, he began with stubby fingers of both hands to ruffle up his thick
Puckering up his face though smiling, and showing his short strong

luck. As soon as you left, it began and went on. Hullo there! Tea!"
fool!" cried Denisov, not pronouncing his r's. "Such ill luck! Such ill
"Weally! And I've been losing, bwother. I lost yesterday like a damned

seen Fraulein Mathilde."
"Long ago," answered Rostov, "I have already been for the hay, and have

"Ah, you're up already," said Denisov, entering the room.

"Well, I am taking it off," replied Lavrushka's voice.

"Lavwuska!" he shouted loudly and angrily, "take it off, blockhead!"

of his head. He came up to the porch gloomily, hanging his head.
wide breeches hanging down in creases, and a crumpled shako on the back
eyes, and black tousled mustache and hair. He wore an unfastened cloak,
coming home. Denisov was a small man with a red face, sparkling black
"Now for trouble!" Rostov looked out of the window and saw Denisov
Ten minutes later Lavrushka brought the coffee. "He's coming!" said he.

"Yes, bring some."

back in a rage. Will you have coffee?"
it, but if he stays out till morning it means he's lost and will come
Lavrushka. "I know by now, if he wins he comes back early to brag about
"Hasn't been in since the evening. Must have been losing," answered

all the regiment knew for a rogue.
"What about your master?" he asked Lavrushka, Denisov's orderly, whom

to the cottage he occupied with Denisov.
and parted smiling, the German returning to his cowshed and Rostov going
brotherly love, wagged their heads in token of their mutual affection,
reason for rejoicing, they looked at each other with joyful delight and
cowshed nor Rostov back with his platoon from foraging for hay had any
"Und vivat die ganze Welt!" Though neither the German cleaning his
Rostov waved his cap above his head like the German and cried laughing,

* "And hurrah for the whole world!"


"Und die ganze Welt hoch!" *

waving it above his head cried:
The German laughed, came out of the cowshed, pulled off his cap, and

Emperor Alexander!"
* (2) "Hurrah for the Austrians! Hurrah for the Russians! Hurrah for

* "Busy already?"


German landlord.
Alexander hoch!" *(2) said he, quoting words often repeated by the
did not leave his eager face. "Hoch Oestreicher! Hoch Russen! Kaiser
"Schon fleissig?" * said Rostov with the same gay brotherly smile which

* "A very good morning! A very good morning!"


greet the young man.
Morgen!" * he said winking with a merry smile, evidently pleased to
immediately brightened on seeing Rostov. "Schon gut Morgen! Schon gut
hand, was clearing manure from the cowhouse, looked out, and his face
porch. His landlord, who in a waistcoat and a pointed cap, pitchfork in
holding up his saber, his spurs jingling, he ran up the steps of the
"Splendid! What a horse he will be!" he thought with a smile, and

lingered for a moment.
serve him. Rostov patted the horse's neck and then his flank, and
evident that the cadet was liberal with his tips and that it paid to
thrown the reins of the snaffle bridle over the horse's head. It was
Another hussar also rushed toward the horse, but Bondarenko had already

"Mind, walk him up and down well!"

"Yes, your excellency," answered the Ukrainian gaily, tossing his head.

people show to everyone when they are happy.
continued, with that gay brotherly cordiality which goodhearted young
headlong to the horse. "Walk him up and down, my dear fellow," he
"Ah, Bondarenko, dear friend!" said he to the hussar who rushed up

part from his horse, and at last sprang down and called to his orderly.
youthful movement, stood for a moment in the stirrup as if loathe to
horse, rode up to the porch, swung his leg over the saddle with a supple
foraging expedition. Rostov in his cadet uniform, with a jerk to his
had not yet come home when Rostov rode back early in the morning from a
proceeding as usual. Denisov, who had been losing at cards all night,
of Mack's defeat, the camp life of the officers of this squadron was
On October 11, the day when all was astir at headquarters over the news

squadron commander.
ever since he had overtaken the regiment in Poland, had lived with the
throughout the whole cavalry division as Vaska Denisov. Cadet Rostov,
assigned to cavalry-captain Denisov, the squadron commander, known
German village of Salzeneck. The best quarters in the village were
squadron in which Nicholas Rostov served as a cadet was quartered in the
The Pavlograd Hussars were stationed two miles from Braunau. The

CHAPTER IV




and went out of the corridor.
He waited a moment to see whether the cornet would answer, but he turned

have made a friend, but not for you, not for you."
* (2) "It is all very well for that good-for-nothing fellow of whom you

and you find that a cause for jesting!"
* "Forty thousand men massacred and the army of our allies destroyed,


him.
word with a French accent--having noticed that Zherkov could still hear
amuse himself in this way," he added in Russian--but pronouncing the
ami, mais pas pour vous, pas pour vous. *(2) Only a hobbledehoy could
bien pour un garcon de rien comme cet individu dont vous avez fait un
he said, as if strengthening his views by this French sentence. "C'est
l'armee de nos allies detruite, et vous trouvez la le mot pour rire," *
nothing for their master's business. Quarante mille hommes massacres et
misfortunes of our common cause, or we are merely lackeys who care
our Tsar and our country, rejoicing in the successes and grieving at the
excitement. "Don't you understand that either we are officers serving
"What's the matter?" exclaimed Prince Andrew standing still in his

him.
"Come, what's the matter, old fellow?" said Nesvitski trying to soothe

taking Nesvitski's arm he left Zherkov, who did not know what to say.
"I am not jesting with you; please be silent!" cried Bolkonski, and

"What's the matter? I only congratulated them," said Zherkov.

at Bolkonski silently with wide-open eyes.
Nesvitski and Zherkov were so surprised by this outburst that they gazed

will teach you to behave yourself."
so; but I warn you that if you dare to play the fool in my presence, I
with a slight trembling of the lower jaw, "I can't prevent your doing
"If you, sir, choose to make a buffoon of yourself," he said sharply,

Russian army found vent in anger at Zherkov's untimely jest.
Mack, the news of his defeat, and the thought of what lay before the
turned to Zherkov. The nervous irritation aroused by the appearance of
Bolkonski, turning still paler, pushed him away with an angry look and
Nesvitski with a laugh threw his arms round Prince Andrew, but

* "Good God, what simplicity!"


"Gott, wie naiv!" * said he angrily, after he had gone a few steps.

The general frowned, turned away, and went on.

beaming smile to his head.
well, only a little bruised just here," he added, pointing with a
"I have the honor to congratulate you. General Mack has arrived, quite

attention. He screwed up his eyes showing that he was listening.
seriousness of his stupid smile, could not but give him a moment's
The member of the Hofkriegsrath looked at him severely but, seeing the

other, awkwardly, like a child at a dancing lesson.
He bowed his head and scraped first with one foot and then with the

the Austrian general, "I have the honor to congratulate you."
"Your excellency," said he in German, stepping forward and addressing

appeared a stupid smile of glee which he seemed unable to suppress.
embarrassing attentions. On the face of the wag Zherkov there suddenly
The generals were passing by, looking as if they wished to avoid

make way!"
"They're coming!... they're coming!... Stand aside, make way, please

his arm, said in a breathless voice,
three officers quite easily, but Zherkov, pushing Nesvitski aside with
There was room enough in the wide corridor for the generals to pass the
the member of the Hofkriegsrath who had arrived the previous evening.
Kutuzov's staff in charge of the provisioning of the Russian army, and
from the other end of the corridor, Strauch, an Austrian general who on
Just as Prince Andrew met Nesvitski and Zherkov, there came toward them

"There's nothing to be gay about," answered Bolkonski.

face and glittering eyes.
"Why are you so glum?" asked Nesvitski noticing Prince Andrew's pale

were as usual laughing.
he met Nesvitski, with whom he shared a room, and the wag Zherkov; they
room to write to his father, to whom he wrote every day. In the corridor
Excited and irritated by these thoughts Prince Andrew went toward his

could not admit the idea of his hero being disgraced.
outweigh all the courage of the Russian troops, and at the same time
French since Suvorov met them. He feared that Bonaparte's genius might
perhaps, see and take part in the first Russian encounter with the
humiliation of arrogant Austria and that in a week's time he might,
Involuntarily he felt a joyful agitation at the thought of the
vividly imagined what awaited it and the part he would have to play.
understood all the difficulties of the Russian army's position, and
details of his disaster he understood that half the campaign was lost,
lay in the general progress of the war. When he saw Mack and heard the
Prince Andrew was one of those rare staff officers whose chief interest

inactive, would also soon have to meet the enemy.
orders which showed that the Russian troops, who had hitherto been
Within half an hour adjutants had been sent in various directions with
and that the whole army had surrendered at Ulm proved to be correct.
The report which had been circulated that the Austrians had been beaten

the door himself behind him.
closed his eyes, silently let Mack enter his room before him, and closed
and his forehead became smooth again, he bowed his head respectfully,
immobile for a few moments. Then wrinkles ran over his face like a wave
Kutuzov's face as he stood in the open doorway remained perfectly

"Vous voyez le malheureux Mack," he uttered in a broken voice.

thin legs, went up to Kutuzov.
running away from some danger, and, making long, quick strides with his
doorway. The general with the bandaged head bent forward as though
off. The door of the private room opened and Kutuzov appeared in the
began to hum to himself, producing a queer sound which immediately broke
intended to say something, but immediately, with affected indifference,
look at me?" Then he lifted his head, stretched his neck as if he
into a chair, gazing at those in the room as if asking, "Why do they
gave it to Kozlovski, stepped quickly to the window, and threw himself
a notebook, hurriedly scribbled something in pencil, tore out the leaf,
The general's face clouded, his lips quivered and trembled. He took out

"The commander-in-chief is engaged," repeated Kozlovski calmly.

rather short, as if surprised that anyone should not know him.
The unknown general looked disdainfully down at Kozlovski, who was

announce?"
to the unknown general and blocking his way to the door. "Whom shall I
"The commander-in-chief is engaged," said Kozlovski, going hurriedly up

straight toward the inner door.
quickly with a harsh German accent, looking to both sides and advancing
"Commander in Chief Kutuzov?" said the newly arrived general speaking

Prince Andrew stopped short.
who had evidently just arrived, entered quickly, slamming the door.
order of Maria Theresa on his neck and a black bandage round his head,
But at that instant a tall Austrian general in a greatcoat, with the

"Probably," said Prince Andrew moving toward the outer door.

"If it were true that he has been beaten, news would have come."

"No."

"Any news from Mack?"

Prince Andrew shrugged his shoulders.

"And why is it?"

advancing."
"I am ordered to write a memorandum explaining why we are not

"Well, Prince?" asked Kozlovski.

Kozlovski, who was sitting at the window with a book.
his hand Prince Andrew came up to his comrade, the aide-de-camp on duty,
Coming out of Kutuzov's room into the waiting room with the papers in

feared him.
Prince Andrew knew how to take his stand so that they respected and even
considered him conceited, cold, and disagreeable. But among these people
was natural and pleasant. Others, the majority, disliked him and
listened to him, admired, and imitated him, and with them Prince Andrew
from themselves and from everyone else, expected great things of him,
opposite reputations. Some, a minority, acknowledged him to be different
Prince Andrew had, as he had had in Petersburg society, two quite
On Kutuzov's staff, among his fellow officers and in the army generally,

subordinate by me.
firmness, and expedition. I consider myself fortunate to have such a
Your son bids fair to become an officer distinguished by his industry,

From Vienna Kutuzov wrote to his old comrade, Prince Andrew's father.
and had taken him to Vienna and given him the more serious commissions.
promised not to forget him, distinguished him above the other adjutants,
Kutuzov, whom he had overtaken in Poland, had received him very kindly,

and more attractive.
with himself and those around him, his smile and glance were brighter
agreeable and interesting work. His face expressed more satisfaction
think of the impression he makes on others, but is occupied with
affected languor and indolence. He now looked like a man who has time to
in his movements, in his walk, scarcely a trace was left of his former
had changed greatly during that period. In the expression of his face,
Though not much time had passed since Prince Andrew had left Russia, he

softly over the carpet and went out into the waiting room.
to tell him. He gathered up the papers and with a bow to both, stepped
first not only what had been said but also what Kutuzov would have liked
Prince Andrew bowed his head in token of having understood from the

army, and then give it to his excellency."
this, showing all the news we have had of the movements of the Austrian
handing him several papers, "make a neat memorandum in French out of all
from His Highness the Archduke Ferdinand and here are these," he said,
from our scouts. Here are two letters from Count Nostitz and here is one
Andrew. "Look here, my dear fellow, get from Kozlovski all the reports
"Excuse me, General," interrupted Kutuzov, also turning to Prince

aide-de-camp.
jests and to come to business. He involuntarily looked round at the
worst," said the Austrian general, evidently wishing to have done with
"But you know the wise maxim your excellency, advising one to expect the

member of the Hofkriegsrath mildly and attentively.
Kutuzov sighed deeply on finishing this paragraph and looked at the

it, easily find a way to prepare for the enemy the fate he deserves.
Russian army will be fully equipped, and shall then, in conjunction with
ally. We shall therefore confidently await the moment when the Imperial
intention should he try to direct his whole force against our faithful
communications, recross the river lower down, and frustrate his
the Lech, we can cross the Danube, throw ourselves on his line of
commanding both sides of the Danube, so that should the enemy not cross
we are masters of Ulm, we cannot be deprived of the advantage of
which to attack and defeat the enemy should he cross the Lech. Also, as
We have fully concentrated forces of nearly seventy thousand men with

German, from the Archduke Ferdinand's letter:
of his mouth read to the Austrian general the following passage, in
have a look at it"--and Kutuzov with an ironical smile about the corners
"Give me that letter," said Kutuzov turning to Prince Andrew. "Please

very favorable.
him of a victory and stated strategically the position of the army was
And, in fact, the last letter he had received from Mack's army informed
same expression, which seemed to say that he had a right to suppose so.
sounded much like irony. But Kutuzov went on blandly smiling with the
that were afloat, and so Kutuzov's suggestion of an Austrian victory
defeat, there were many circumstances confirming the unfavorable rumors
The general frowned. Though there was no definite news of an Austrian

our aid," said Kutuzov.
Mack, have by now already gained a decisive victory and no longer need
Austrian troops, under the direction of so skillful a leader as General
His Highness the Archduke Ferdinand has honored me, I imagine that the
"But that is my conviction, and judging by the last letter with which

Kutuzov bowed with the same smile.

prearranged sentence.
accustomed to win in their battles," he concluded his evidently
Russian troops and their commander of the laurels they have been
Majesty; but we think the present delay is depriving the splendid
excellency's participation in the common action is highly valued by His
contrasted with his flattering words, "on the contrary, your
"On the contrary," he said, in a querulous and angry tone that

in the same tone.
The Austrian general looked dissatisfied, but had no option but to reply

but you have no grounds for telling me so. And that is the whole point."
liberty not to believe me and I don't even care whether you do or not,
And Kutuzov smiled in a way that seemed to say, "You are quite at

too strong for us, General."
lay down all this heavy responsibility. But circumstances are sometimes
informed and more skillful general--of whom Austria has so many--and to
hand over the supreme command of the army into the hands of a better
believe me on my honour that to me personally it would be a pleasure to
been fulfilled long ago. I should long ago have joined the archduke. And
personal wishes, the will of His Majesty the Emperor Francis would have
own voice. "All I can say, General, is that if the matter depended on my
word. It was evident that Kutuzov himself listened with pleasure to his
and intonation that obliged one to listen to each deliberately spoken
"All I can say, General," said he with a pleasant elegance of expression

French.
was asking the adjutant to wait, and he went on with the conversation in
"Ah!..." said Kutuzov glancing at Bolkonski as if by this exclamation he

sitting at the table on which a plan was spread out.
papers. Kutuzov and the Austrian member of the Hofkriegsrath were
army. Prince Andrew Bolkonski came into the room with the required
had come from the Archduke Ferdinand, who was in command of the advanced
to the condition of the troops on their arrival, and the letters that
private room and, calling his adjutant, asked for some papers relating
On returning from the review, Kutuzov took the Austrian general into his

CHAPTER III




the company, and overtook the carriage, still keeping time to the song.
to foot uncertain with which to start, then settled down, galloped past
Zherkov touched his horse with the spurs; it pranced excitedly from foot

"It's a long, long way. To my native land..."


"Good health..."

"Good-bye."

"And I only..."

"Well, never mind; I only..."

take it!"
Dolokhov smiled. "Don't trouble. If I want anything, I won't beg--I'll

"Come if you need anything. One can at least be of use on the staff..."

They were again silent.

"We shall see."

"Well, that's only till the first engagement."

reinstated."
"I can't. I've sworn not to. I won't drink and won't play till I get

"Do come."

"Why, have you too much money?"

Zherkov.
"I say, come round some evening and we'll have a game of faro!" said

"I'm glad," answered Dolokhov briefly and clearly, as the song demanded.

"The devil only knows! They say so."

"Is it true that Austrians have been beaten?" asked Dolokhov.

that song.
conversation would probably have been different but for the effect of
arousing an involuntary sensation of courage and cheerfulness. Their
"She let the hawk fly upward from her wide right sleeve," went the song,

Both were silent.

"I was attached; I'm on duty."

staff?"
"All right. They are good fellows. And how have you wriggled onto the

"And how do you get on with the officers?" inquired Zherkov.

Dolokhov's reply.
gaiety with which Zherkov spoke, and to the intentional coldness of
The lively song gave a special flavor to the tone of free and easy

"How am I?" Dolokhov answered coldly. "I am as you see."

horse keep pace with the company.
"My dear fellow, how are you?" said he through the singing, making his

friend.
to the gentleman ranker, he addressed him with the cordiality of an old
and had not seen fit to recognize him. But now that Kutuzov had spoken
wild set led by Dolokhov. Zherkov had met Dolokhov abroad as a private
Hussar cornet Zherkov had at one time, in Petersburg, belonged to the

up to Dolokhov.
mimicked the regimental commander, fell back from the carriage and rode
marching with the company. The hussar cornet of Kutuzov's suite who had
those driving past as if he pitied all who were not at that moment
with particular grace and boldness in time to the song and looking at
eyed soldier involuntarily attracted notice. It was Dolokhov marching
the right flank, beside which the carriage passed the company, a blue-
soldier and the gay and smartly marching men. In the second file from
pleasure at the sound of the singing and the sight of the dancing
should continue to march at ease, and he and all his suite showed
returning to the town. The commander-in-chief made a sign that the men
and the tramp of horses' hoofs were heard. Kutuzov and his suite were
steps. Behind the company the sound of wheels, the creaking of springs,
swinging their arms and keeping time spontaneously, marched with long
flourished his castanets as if threatening someone. The soldiers,
walking backwards before the company, jerked his shoulders and
in spite of the burden of his equipment, rushed out to the front and,
"Oh, my bower new...!" chimed in twenty voices, and the castanet player,

"Oh, my bower, oh, my bower...!"

down and began:
above his head and, holding it there for some seconds, suddenly flung it
both arms as if carefully lifting some invisible but precious object
Then having satisfied himself that all eyes were fixed on him, he raised
soldier of forty--looked sternly at the singers and screwed up his eyes.
if flinging something to the ground, the drummer--a lean, handsome
Having jerked out these last words as soldiers do and waved his arms as

Kutuzov."
change being that the words "Father Kamenski" were replaced by "Father
composed in the Turkish campaign and now being sung in Austria, the only
brothers, on to glory, led by Father Kamenski." This song had been
words: "Morning dawned, the sun was rising," and concluding: "On then,
his arm, began a long-drawn-out soldiers' song, commencing with the
drummer, their leader, turned round facing the singers, and flourishing
And from the different ranks some twenty men ran to the front. A

"Singers to the front" came the captain's order.

Germans."
to be Poles--all under the Russian crown--but here they're all regular
"And here, friend, the people are quite beggarly. There they all seemed

are drawn along."
"Wasn't it fine when those Germans gave us lifts! You just sit still and

without eating."
"They might call a halt here or we'll have to do another four miles

well, never mind, here you are."
"And did you give me tobacco yesterday? That's just it, friend! Ah,

"Give me a biscuit, you devil!"

we reach our quarters."
into the village already... they will have their buckwheat cooked before
"What devils these quartermasters are! See, the fifth company is turning

better listen more carefully!"
begin. And he says Buonaparte is in Braunau! Shows you're a fool. You'd
them down. When they've been put down, the war with Buonaparte will
The Prussians are up in arms now. The Austrians, you see, are putting
"Buonaparte himself!... Just listen to the fool, what he doesn't know!

near him. Everybody said that Buonaparte himself was at Braunau."
"I say, Fedeshon!... Did he say when the battles are to begin? You were

the guns."
with chalk--as white as flour! I suppose they polish him up as they do
"And that other one with him, the Austrian, looked as if he were smeared

"When he looked at my feet, friend... well, thinks I..."

noticed everything..."
"No, friend, he is sharper-eyed than you are. Boots and leg bands... he

"And so he is! Quite blind!"

"And they said Kutuzov was blind of one eye?"

heard on every side.
soldiers. The company marched on gaily. The soldiers' voices could be
The cheerful mood of their officers after the inspection infected the

regimental commander was nicknamed King of Hearts).
"In a word, a hearty one..." said the subaltern, laughing (the

Timokhin to the subaltern beside him.
"Well, he's really a good fellow, one can serve under him," said

overtook the next one.
thank you all! God be praised!" and he rode past that company and
vodka for the men from me," he added so that the soldiers could hear. "I
"Well, that's all right," continued the regimental commander. "A cup of

smile on his lips change.
Dolokhov looked round but did not say anything, nor did the mocking

"After the next affair... epaulettes."

in his horse, said to him:
The regimental commander sought out Dolokhov in the ranks and, reining

"Well, of course, of course!"

understood his commander's wish.
"I will, your excellency," said Timokhin, showing by his smile that he

connections... Well, then, you just..."
have pity on a young man in misfortune. You know he has important
"Oh, well, well!" remarked the regimental commander. "Still, one must

beast.... In Poland, if you please, he nearly killed a Jew."
sensible, well educated, and good-natured, and the next he's a wild
"It's different on different days," answered the captain. "One day he is

"And what about his character?" asked the regimental commander.

but his character..." said Timokhin.
"As far as the service goes he is quite punctilious, your excellency;

himself, and in general..."
And tell me, please--I've been meaning to ask--how is he behaving
"And tell Mr. Dolokhov that I won't forget him--he may be quite easy.

Ismail.
teeth were missing that had been knocked out by the butt end of a gun at
his nose growing redder as he gave a smile which showed where two front
"Don't mention it, General, as if I'd be so bold!" replied the captain,

hand to the captain.
apologize, you know me!... He was very pleased!" And he held out his
helped... one is sometimes a bit hasty on parade... I am the first to
irrepressible delight.) "It's in the Emperor's service... it can't be
commander's face now that the inspection was happily over beamed with
riding up to Captain Timokhin who was walking in front. (The regimental
commander, overtaking the third company on its way to its quarters and
"You won't bear me a grudge, Prokhor Ignatych?" said the regimental

to rest after their hard marches.
quarters near Braunau, where they hoped to receive boots and clothes and
The regiment broke up into companies, which went to their appointed

carriage.
it and it was not at all what he wanted. He turned away and went to the
everything he could say had long been known to him, that he was weary of
grimace as if to say that everything Dolokhov had said to him and
from Captain Timokhin again flitted over his face. He turned away with a
Kutuzov turned away. The same smile of the eyes with which he had turned

and prove my devotion to His Majesty the Emperor and to Russia!"
ringing, deliberate voice. "I ask an opportunity to atone for my fault
"One thing I ask of your excellency," Dolokhov said in his firm,

so widely from a private.
to tear open the veil of convention that separates a commander-in-chief
they had looked at the regimental commander, seeming by their expression
The clear blue eyes looked at the commander-in-chief just as boldly as

The Emperor is gracious, and I shan't forget you if you deserve well."
"Ah!" said Kutuzov. "I hope this will be a lesson to you. Do your duty.

"This is Dolokhov," said Prince Andrew.

"Have you a complaint to make?" Kutuzov asked with a slight frown.

commander in chief, and presented arms.
with his clear blue eyes, stepped forward from the ranks, went up to the
not wait to be called. The shapely figure of the fair-haired soldier,
Dolokhov, who had already changed into a soldier's gray greatcoat, did

"Where is Dolokhov?" asked Kutuzov.

in this regiment."
"You told me to remind you of the officer Dolokhov, reduced to the ranks

suite and said in French:
to recollect something. Prince Andrew stepped forward from among the
The third company was the last, and Kutuzov pondered, apparently trying

a most serious, deferential, and innocent expression.
and while Kutuzov was turning managed to make a grimace and then assume
turned round. The officer evidently had complete control of his face,
with such exactitude that Nesvitski could not help laughing. Kutuzov
captain and his drawn-in stomach, and mimicked his expression and pose
not answer. The hussar at that moment noticed the face of the red-nosed
The regimental commander was afraid he might be blamed for this and did

him. "He used to have a predilection for Bacchus."
"We all have our weaknesses," said Kutuzov smiling and walking away from

"Highly satisfied, your excellency!"
officer as in a looking glass--started, moved forward, and answered:
And the latter--unconscious that he was being reflected in the hussar

with him?" he asked the regimental commander.
"Another Ismail comrade," said he. "A brave officer! Are you satisfied

scarred and puffy face.
quickly turned away, a scarcely perceptible smile flitting over his
who evidently understood his case and wished him nothing but good,
it had the commander-in-chief continued to look at him, and so Kutuzov,
himself up to such an extent that it seemed he could not have sustained
commander, but now that the commander-in-chief addressed him he drew
than Timokhin had done when he was reprimanded by the regimental
One would have thought it impossible for a man to stretch himself more

reprimanded on account of the blue greatcoat.
"Ah, Timokhin!" said he, recognizing the red-nosed captain who had been

involuntarily came closer to him.
company he suddenly stopped. His suite, not having expected this,
starting from their sockets to watch their chief. On reaching the third
Kutuzov walked slowly and languidly past thousands of eyes which were

wag.
manner. Nesvitski laughed and nudged the others to make them look at the
bent forward, the hussar started and bent forward in exactly the same
and mimicked his every movement. Each time the commander started and
expression of his fixed eyes, watched the regimental commander's back
This hussar, with a grave face and without a smile or a change in the
laughter provoked by a swarthy hussar officer who walked beside him.
smiling, handsome face and moist eyes. Nesvitski could hardly keep from
Nesvitski, a tall staff officer, extremely stout, with a kindly,
handsome adjutant. This was Prince Bolkonski. Beside him was his comrade
and sometimes laughed. Nearest of all to the commander-in-chief walked a
some twenty men of his suite. These gentlemen talked among themselves
distance that allowed every softly spoken word to be heard, followed
commander-in-chief's regarding the regiment. Behind Kutuzov, at a
forward on each such occasion, fearing to miss a single word of the
noticing what a bad state of things it was. The regimental commander ran
which seemed to say that he was not blaming anyone, but could not help
head sadly, pointing them out to the Austrian general with an expression
also to the soldiers. Looking at their boots he several times shook his
friendly words to officers he had known in the Turkish war, sometimes
Kutuzov walked through the ranks, sometimes stopping to say a few

the boots.
were only 217 sick and stragglers. Everything was in good order except
had reached Braunau at the same time, was in splendid condition. There
assiduity of its commander the regiment, in comparison with others that
greater zeal than his duty as a commander. Thanks to the strictness and
was evident that he performed his duty as a subordinate with even
darted forward at every word or gesture of the commander-in-chief, it
and hardly able to restrain his jerky movements, and from the way he
the way he walked through the ranks behind the generals, bending forward
devoured him with his eyes, drawing himself up obsequiously, and from
From the way the regimental commander saluted the commander-in-chief and

general in white, accompanied by the suite, walked between the ranks.
first Kutuzov stood still while the regiment moved; then he and the
to your ex... len... len... lency!" and again all became silent. At
voice of the commander-in-chief was heard. The regiment roared, "Health
jingling sound it presented arms. Then amidst a dead silence the feeble
The word of command rang out, and again the regiment quivered, as with a

breathlessly gazing at him and the regimental commander did not exist.
stepped down from the carriage just as if those two thousand men
talking in low voices and Kutuzov smiled slightly as treading heavily he
stopped in front of the regiment. Kutuzov and the Austrian general were
uniform that looked strange among the Russian black ones. The caleche
a convoy of Croats. Beside Kutuzov sat an Austrian general, in a white
by six horses at a smart trot. Behind the caleche galloped the suite and
light blue Viennese caleche, slightly creaking on its springs and drawn
Along the broad country road, edged on both sides by trees, came a high,

for the approaching chief.
which expressed joy for himself, severity for the regiment, and welcome
"Att-ention!" shouted the regimental commander in a soul-shaking voice

preening its plumage and became motionless.
mouth awry, prepared to shout. The regiment fluttered like a bird
drew his saber, and with a happy and resolute countenance, opening his
with trembling hands, threw his body across the saddle, righted himself,
The regimental commander, flushing, ran to his horse, seized the stirrup

"He's coming!" shouted the signaler at that moment.

CHAPTER II




turned away.
"I request you to have the goodness to change your coat," he said as he

angrily pulling down his tight scarf.
The eyes of the general and the soldier met. The general became silent,

tones.
"Not bound to endure insults," Dolokhov concluded in loud, ringing

"No talking in the ranks!... No talking, no talking!"

hurriedly interrupted.
"General, I must obey orders, but I am not bound to endure..." Dolokhov

ras..." he did not finish.
"Why a blue coat? Off with it... Sergeant major! Change his coat... the

clear, insolent eyes in the general's face.
Dolokhov slowly straightened his bent knee, looking straight with his

five men between him and Dolokhov with his bluish-gray uniform.
commander with a tone of suffering in his voice, while there were still
"H-o-o-w are you standing? Where's your leg? Your leg?" shouted the

because his line was not straight, he reached the third company.
wrath. Having snapped at an officer for an unpolished badge, at another
anger and walking up to the regiment wished to find a further excuse for
steps down the line. He was evidently pleased at his own display of
And the commander, turning to look at the adjutant, directed his jerky

you to dress your men decently."
word to you and you... What?" he added with renewed irritation, "I beg
regimental commander cooling down a little. "Leave indeed.... One says a
"Gave him leave? Leave? That's just like you young men," said the

"Your excellency, you gave him leave yourself, on the march."

a soldier, he should be dressed in regulation uniform like the others."
"Well? Has he been degraded into a field marshal, or into a soldier? If

ranks," said the captain softly.
"Your excellency, it's the officer Dolokhov, who has been reduced to the

excellency?... nobody knows."
"Well, your excellency, what? Your excellency! But what about your

"Your excellency..."

Hungarian?" said the commander with an austere gibe.
"Well, why don't you speak? Whom have you got there dressed up as a

pressure lay his only hope of salvation.
pressed two fingers more and more rigidly to his cap, as if in this
The commander of the company, with his eyes fixed on his superior,

you to dress the men in fancy coats for a parade.... Eh...?"
commander in chief is expected and you leave your place? Eh? I'll teach
cloth, which contrasted with the others. "What have you been after? The
at a soldier in the ranks of the third company in a greatcoat of bluish
shouted the regimental commander, thrusting forward his jaw and pointing
"You will soon be dressing your men in petticoats! What is this?"

came up panting, slackening his pace as he approached.
twitched nervously. The general looked the captain up and down as he
the redness of which was evidently due to intemperance, and his mouth
told to repeat a lesson he has not learned. Spots appeared on his nose,
general. The captain's face showed the uneasiness of a schoolboy who is
the habit of running, trotted awkwardly stumbling on his toes toward the
from behind his company and, though he was a middle-aged man and not in
cry of: "The general to the third company," the missing officer appeared
When the eager but misrepeated words had reached their destination in a

the lines and an adjutant ran to look for the missing officer.
the general... third company to the commander." The words passed along
"Commander of the third company wanted by the general!... commander to

third company!"
"Whatever is this? This!" he shouted and stood still. "Commander of the

to the front of the regiment and examined it from a distance.
instead of black. The regimental commander walked with his jerky steps
In half an hour all was again in order, only the squares had become gray

with upraised arms.
over their heads, unstrapping their overcoats and drawing the sleeves on
up their knapsacks with a jerk of their shoulders and pulling the straps
hum with voices. On all sides soldiers were running to and fro, throwing
to then been in regular order and silent began to sway and stretch and
were not in very good condition), and instantly the squares that had up
to their companies, the sergeants major began bustling (the greatcoats
soldiers to change into their greatcoats. The company commanders ran off
The regimental commander, going up to the line himself, ordered the

"I don't know, General...."

"Shall we have time to change clothes?"

"In an hour's time, I should say."

personage he was referring to.
aide-de-camp with a respectful politeness evidently relating to the
command. "Sergeants major!... How soon will he be here?" he asked the
forward. "Company commanders!" he shouted in a voice accustomed to
battalion commander. "Oh, my God!" he added, stepping resolutely
the march' it meant in greatcoats?" said he reproachfully to the
"There now! Didn't I tell you, Michael Mitrich, that if it was said 'on

"A fine mess we've made of it!" he remarked.

spread out his arms with a choleric gesture.
regimental commander hung his head, silently shrugged his shoulders, and
commander-in-chief would otherwise be dissatisfied. On hearing this the
should be in their greatcoats and in marching order, and that the
circumstances, he nevertheless delivered the definite order that the men
in-chief would be. Though the aide-de-camp did not know these
so the worse the condition it was in, the better pleased the commander-
arrived from Russia. With this object he intended to meet the regiment;
to show the Austrian general the wretched state in which the troops
junction advisable, meant, among other arguments in support of his view,
the Archduke Ferdinand and Mack, and Kutuzov, not considering this
before with proposals and demands for him to join up with the army of
A member of the Hofkriegsrath from Vienna had come to Kutuzov the day

whatever.
march: in their greatcoats, and packs, and without any preparation
wished to see the regiment just in the state in which it had been on the
clearly worded the day before, namely, that the commander-in-chief
The aide-de-camp was sent to confirm the order which had not been

followed by a Cossack.
posted, two men appeared on horse back. They were an aide-de-camp
At that moment, on the road from the town on which signalers had been

"What?" asked the commander.

"It would not be turned off the field even on the Tsaritsin Meadow."

The battalion commander perceived the jovial irony and laughed.

regiment is not a bad one, eh?"
felt happy). "We had our hands full last night. However, I think the
commanders who smilingly pressed forward (it was plain that they both
"Well, Michael Mitrich, sir?" he said, addressing one of the battalion

thoughts.
matters, social interests and the fair sex occupied no small part of his
engrossed by it, yet his strut seemed to indicate that, besides military
admired his regiment, rejoiced in it, and that his whole mind was
himself up, slightly arching his back. It was plain that the commander
his life. He walked about in front of the line and at every step pulled
had the air of a man happily performing one of the most solemn duties of
which seemed to stand rather than lie down on his massive shoulders. He
showing the creases where it had been folded and thick gold epaulettes
chest to back than across the shoulders. He had on a brand-new uniform
thick-set general with grizzled eyebrows and whiskers, and wider from
The commander of the regiment was an elderly, choleric, stout, and

some seven hundred miles.
been issued by the Austrian commissariat, and the regiment had marched
regimental commander, for in spite of repeated demands boots had not
boots were in holes. But this defect was not due to any fault of the
ease. It was the state of the soldiers' boots. More than half the men's
There was only one circumstance concerning which no one could be at
appointed number of articles, "awl, soap, and all," as the soldiers say.
would have found on every man a clean shirt, and in every knapsack the
but had it pleased the commander-in-chief to look under the uniforms he
and shone with cleanliness. And not only externally was all in order,
knew his place and his duty, had every button and every strap in place,
before--presented a well-ordered array of two thousand men each of whom
straggling, disorderly crowd it had been on its last march the day
calculated and reckoned, and by morning the regiment--instead of the
without closing their eyes, while the adjutants and company commanders
after a twenty-mile march, were kept mending and cleaning all night long
always better to "bow too low than not bow low enough." So the soldiers,
to present the regiment in parade order, on the principle that it is
not, it was decided at a consultation between the battalion commanders
the question arose whether the troops were to be in marching order or
the words of the order were not clear to the regimental commander, and
the commander-in-chief would inspect the regiment on the march. Though
On the evening of the last day's march an order had been received that

inspection anywhere in the heart of Russia.
had just the appearance of any Russian regiment preparing for an
gazed with curiosity at the soldiers) were not Russians, the regiment
hills in the distance--and despite the fact that the inhabitants (who
locality and surroundings--fruit gardens, stone fences, tiled roofs, and
the commander-in-chief. Despite the un-Russian appearance of the
Braunau had halted half a mile from the town, waiting to be inspected by
On October 11, 1805, one of the infantry regiments that had just reached

the commander-in-chief, Kutuzov.
inhabitants on whom they were quartered. Braunau was the headquarters of
Russia were settling near the fortress of Braunau and burdening the
the Archduchy of Austria, and yet other regiments freshly arriving from
In October, 1805, a Russian army was occupying the villages and towns of

CHAPTER I




BOOK TWO: 1805

the door.
unconscious little princess, he shook his head reprovingly and slammed
"Gone? That's all right!" said he; and looking angrily at the

dressing gown looked out.
door opened quickly and the stern figure of the old man in the white
angrily blowing his nose. Hardly had Prince Andrew gone when the study
the study, like pistol shots, came the frequent sound of the old man
Andrew had gone and made the sign of the cross in his direction. From
with her beautiful eyes full of tears at the door through which Prince
her temples. Princess Mary, supporting her sister-in-law, still looked
The little princess lay in the armchair, Mademoiselle Bourienne chafing

kissing her, and then he left the room with rapid steps.
"Adieu, Mary," said he gently to his sister, taking her by the hand and

and carefully placed her in an easy chair.
He cautiously released the shoulder she leaned on, looked into her face,

He embraced her. She screamed and fell unconscious on his shoulder.

with dismay at her husband.
"Andrew, already!" said the little princess, turning pale and looking

through your performance."
And this "Well!" sounded coldly ironic, as if he were saying,: "Now go

"Well!" he said, turning to his wife.

Prince Andrew sighed and made no reply.

gown, spectacled and wigless, shouting in an angry voice.
the door Prince Andrew and the figure of the old man in a white dressing
"What is it? What?" asked both princesses when they saw for a moment at

opening his door.
"We've said good-by. Go!" he suddenly shouted in a loud, angry voice,

old prince's face.
fixed straight on his son's. Something twitched in the lower part of the
They stood silent, facing one another. The old man's sharp eyes were

"Not let the wife have him?" said the old man, and laughed.

yesterday... let him grow up with you.... Please."
if I have a son, do not let him be taken away from you--as I said
"I also wanted to ask you," continued Prince Andrew, "if I'm killed and

The old man was silent.

"You need not have said that to me, Father," said the son with a smile.

son of Nicholas Bolkonski, I shall be ashamed!"
voice suddenly shrieked: "but if I hear that you have not behaved like a
your old father..." he paused unexpectedly, and then in a querulous
him. "Remember this, Prince Andrew, if they kill you it will hurt me,
"Well, now, good-by!" He gave his son his hand to kiss, and embraced

"I will do it all, Father," he said.

yet. He felt that he must not say it.
Andrew did not tell his father that he would no doubt live a long time

when I am gone. You will find them useful."
wars. Send it to the Academy. Here are some jottings for you to read
a letter; it is a premium for the man who writes a history of Suvorov's
hand them to the Emperor after my death. Now here is a Lombard bond and
"I shall probably die before you. So remember, these are my memoirs;

bold, tall, close handwriting.
lid, drew out a drawer, and took out an exercise book filled with his
was accustomed to understand him. He led him to the desk, raised the
He spoke so rapidly that he did not finish half his words, but his son

*Kutuzov.


disfavor. Now come here."
Nicholas Bolkonski's son need not serve under anyone if he is in
Write and tell me how he receives you. If he is all right--serve him.
long as an adjutant: a bad position! Tell him I remember and like him.
written that he should make use of you in proper places and not keep you
be. Now listen! Give this letter to Michael Ilarionovich. * I have
"Listen!" said he; "don't worry about your wife: what can be done shall

understood him. The old man got up and gave the letter to his son.
Andrew did not speak; he was both pleased and displeased that his father

easy," said he in abrupt sentences while sealing his letter.
"What's to be done? She's pretty! I will do everything. Make your mind

down the wax, the seal, and the paper, with his accustomed rapidity.
old man continued to fold and seal his letter, snatching up and throwing
The son sighed, thus admitting that his father had understood him. The

him, and again laughed his frigid laugh.
straight into his son's face with keen eyes which seemed to see through
He seized his son by the hand with small bony fingers, shook it, looked

yourself."
one can't unmarry. Don't be afraid; I won't tell anyone, but you know it
"No, it can't be helped, lad," said the prince. "They're all like that;

"I don't understand!" said Prince Andrew.

"The wife!" said the old prince, briefly and significantly.

"What is bad, Father?"

"It's a bad business, eh?"

laugh.
He signed with a flourish and suddenly turning to his son began to

writing. "I'll do it."
"Hm... Hm..." muttered the old prince to himself, finishing what he was

telling her things. She has had a dream and is frightened."
only one goes wrong, but it is her fancy and mine. They have been
Prince Andrew, evidently confused. "I know that out of a million cases
"I know that no one can help if nature does not do her work," said

stern eyes on his son.
The old prince stopped writing and, as if not understanding, fixed his

him be here...."
"When her confinement is due, send to Moscow for an accoucheur.... Let

"Why talk nonsense? Say what you want."

"About my wife... I am ashamed as it is to leave her on your hands..."

say it. These two things can be done together," he added.
that his quill spluttered and squeaked. "If you have anything to say,
Service before everything. Thanks, thanks!" And he went on writing, so
"For not dilly-dallying and not hanging to a woman's apron strings. The

"What do you thank me for?"

"Kiss me here," and he touched his cheek: "Thanks, thanks!"

"I've come to say good-by."

"Going?" And he went on writing.

son, sat at the table writing. He glanced round.
spectacles and white dressing gown, in which he received no one but his
When Prince Andrew entered the study the old man in his old-age

were waiting for them to come out.
father's study as the latter wished to say good-by to him alone. All
Mary, and the little princess. Prince Andrew had been called to his
reception hall: Michael Ivanovich, Mademoiselle Bourienne, Princess
young prince. The members of the household were all gathered in the
domestic serfs were crowding in the hall, waiting to bid good-by to the
house was brilliant with lights shining through its lofty windows. The
Servants with lanterns were bustling about in the porch. The immense
night, so dark that the coachman could not see the carriage pole.
The coach with six horses was waiting at the porch. It was an autumn

their journey. She answered him and continued her chatter.
Andrew came up, stroked her hair, and asked if she felt rested after
incessantly, repeating Petersburg reminiscences and even phrases. Prince
rosy, was sitting in an easy chair with her work in her hands, talking
five times. He entered the room softly. The little princess, plump and
Andrew had already heard from his wife in the presence of others some
This very sentence about Countess Zubova and this same laugh Prince

ha! Mary!"
full of false teeth, as if she were trying to cheat old age.... Ha, ha,
"No, but imagine the old Countess Zubova, with false curls and her mouth

up for lost time.
usual in French, and as if after long self-restraint she wished to make
one word after another, came through the open door. She was speaking as
sister's room his wife was already awake and her merry voice, hurrying
Frenchwoman blushed and went away without a word. When he reached his
and hair, without looking at her eyes, with such contempt that the
came over his face. He said nothing to her but looked at her forehead
Prince Andrew looked sternly at her and an expression of anger suddenly

blushing and dropping her eyes.
"Oh! I thought you were in your room," she said, for some reason

artless smile, she had met him in secluded passages.
sweetly. It was the third time that day that, with an ecstatic and
with the other, Prince Andrew met Mademoiselle Bourienne smiling
On the way to his sister's room, in the passage which connected one wing

"Well, may be!" said Prince Andrew. "Go, Masha; I'll come immediately."

answered."
give you the love you do not feel, and your prayer would have been
"Andrew, if you had faith you would have turned to God and asked Him to
Princess Mary rose and moved to the door, then stopped and said:

away. Put this on the seat and this to the right."
a moment. Petrushka!" he called to his valet: "Come here, take these
"Let us go to her, I must say good-by. Or--go and wake and I'll come in

her head toward the darkness of the open doorway.
unaccustomed brightness, but he was looking not at his sister but over
forehead. His fine eyes lit up with a thoughtful, kindly, and
As he said this he rose, went to his sister, and, stooping, kissed her

is so I don't know..."
you want to know whether I am happy? No! Is she happy? No! But why this
circumstances I may be placed. But if you want to know the truth... if
anything in regard to her; and that always will be so in whatever
shall reproach my wife with anything, and I cannot reproach myself with
"Know this, Masha: I can't reproach, have not reproached, and never

asleep. Prince Andrew felt sorry for his sister.
fate, her father-in-law, and her husband. After crying she had fallen
about her confinement, and how she dreaded it, and had complained of her
princess had been crying after dinner and had spoken of her forebodings
say something but could not. Her brother had guessed right: the little
The patches grew deeper on her forehead, neck, and cheeks. She tried to

am sorry for that," he went on.
"I have said nothing to you, but you have already been talked to. And I

she felt guilty.
Red patches appeared on Princess Mary's face and she was silent as if

her. Why do you say all this to me?"
"I do not think I have complained of my wife to you, Masha, or blamed

natured, and her position now is a very hard one."
to be. Don't judge Lise harshly," she began. "She is so sweet, so good-
"As I was saying to you, Andrew, be kind and generous as you always used

on the sofa. They were silent for a while.
"Thank you, my dear." She kissed him on the forehead and sat down again

he was touched, but also a gleam of irony on his face.
crossed himself and kissed the icon. There was a look of tenderness, for
would have taken the icon, but she stopped him. Andrew understood,
the whole of her thin, sickly face and made it beautiful. Her brother
Rays of gentle light shone from her large, timid eyes. Those eyes lit up

"Please, Andrew, for my sake!..."

She crossed herself, kissed the icon, and handed it to Andrew.

setting, on a finely wrought silver chain.
brother a small, oval, antique, dark-faced icon of the Saviour in a gold
trembling with emotion, solemnly holding up in both hands before her
Himself, for in Him alone is truth and peace," said she in a voice
"Against your will He will save and have mercy on you and bring you to

added: "I am glad; really, dear, I am very glad."
expression his joke had brought to his sister's face, he repented and
please you..." said Prince Andrew. But immediately, noticing the pained
"If it does not weigh a hundredweight and won't break my neck... To

never take it off. Do you promise?"
"Andrew, I bless you with this icon and you must promise me you will

"Of course. What is it?"

she was holding in her reticule.) "So you promise?"
grandfather, wore it in all his wars." (She still did not take out what
please, but do this for my sake! Please do! Father's father, our
"Think what you please! I know you are just like Father. Think as you

if guessing what it was about.
"Even if it were a great deal of trouble..." answered Prince Andrew, as

She looked timidly at her brother.

granted.
subject of her request and must not be shown before the request was
taking out what she was holding inside it, as if what she held were the
Andrusha!..." said she, putting her hand in her reticule but not yet
is nothing unworthy of you, but it will comfort me. Promise,
"No--promise that you will not refuse! It will give you no trouble and

"What is it, dear?"

of you."
she said timidly after a moment's silence, "I have a great favor to ask
"Ah! mon ami, I only pray, and hope that God will hear me. Andrew..."

said Prince Andrew banteringly yet tenderly.
"Ah! my dear, I am afraid you and your monk are wasting your powder,"

monk he received and had a long talk with."
improvement. His satire has been less bitter of late, and there was a
makes me unhappy. But even in this I can see lately a shade of
clear as day, and can go so far astray. That is the only thing that
understand how a man of his immense intellect can fail to see what is as
Andrew... is Father's way of treating religious subjects. I don't
"The only thing that is hard for me... I will tell you the truth,

Her brother shook his head incredulously.

and happy with him. I only wish you were all as happy as I am."
veneration could such a man as my father evoke? And I am so contented
can one judge Father? But even if one might, what feeling except
rather than the trend of the conversation--"and that's a great sin. How
pride," said the princess, following the train of her own thoughts
"You are good in every way, Andrew, but you have a kind of intellectual

in order to puzzle or test his sister.
trying," said Prince Andrew, apparently speaking lightly of their father
"He always was rather harsh; and now I should think he's getting very

"For me? For me?... Trying for me!..." said she.

Princess Mary was first surprised and then aghast at this question.

things trying for you, doesn't it?" Prince Andrew asked suddenly.
"To be quite frank, Mary, I expect Father's character sometimes makes

reading. She reads to him in the evenings and reads splendidly."
own father. She is very good-natured, and my father likes her way of
have done them.' Father took her when she was homeless after losing her
love people so much for the good they have done us, as for the good we
because he has been a benefactor to them both. As Sterne says: 'We don't
Ivanovich are the two people to whom he is always gentle and kind,
I like being alone.... Father likes her very much. She and Michael
even in my way. You know I always was a savage, and now am even more so.
She has no one, no one. To tell the truth, I don't need her, and she's
"No? She is very nice and kind and, above all, she's much to be pitied.

"I don't like your Mademoiselle Bourienne at all," said Prince Andrew.

There is only Mademoiselle Bourienne...."
resources I have for entertaining a woman used to the best society.
alone--for Papa is always busy, and I... well, you know what poor
woman to be buried in the country during the best years of her life, all
and can't, for I know no other. But think, Andrew: for a young society
"I... that's different. Why speak of me? I don't want any other life,

"You live in the country and don't think the life terrible," he replied.

think we thoroughly understand.
Prince Andrew smiled as he looked at his sister, as we smile at those we

* To understand all is to forgive all.


condition! It's very hard."
be parted from her husband and be left alone in the country, in her
what it must be for her, poor thing, after what she has been used to, to
everyone's situation. Tout comprendre, c'est tout pardonner. * Think
and so her position now is not a rosy one. We should enter into
Andrew? Don't forget that she has grown up and been educated in society,
"One must be indulgent to little weaknesses; who is free from them,

contemptuous look that showed itself on his face.
Prince Andrew was silent, but the princess noticed the ironical and

child. I have grown so fond of her."
the sofa, facing her brother. "She is quite a child: such a dear, merry
Andrew! What a treasure of a wife you have," said she, sitting down on
"She was so tired that she has fallen asleep on the sofa in my room. Oh,

"And where is Lise?" he asked, answering her question only by a smile.

-the slender mischievous boy who had been her playfellow in childhood.
strange to her to think that this stern handsome man should be Andrusha-
She smiled as she uttered his pet name, "Andrusha." It was obviously

explain such a question.
with me for coming? You have changed so, Andrusha," she added, as if to
you alone! God knows how long we may again be parted. You are not angry
apparently been running), "and I did so wish to have another talk with
"I hear you have given orders to harness," she cried, panting (she had

expression. It was the heavy tread of Princess Mary that he heard.
of the small box, and assumed his usual tranquil and impenetrable
hurriedly unclasped his hands, stopped at a table as if tying the cover
to be seen in that mood, for hearing footsteps in the passage he
he sad at leaving his wife?--perhaps both, but evidently he did not wish
and thoughtfully shaking his head. Did he fear going to the war, or was
briskly from corner to corner of the room, looking straight before him
looked very thoughtful and tender. With his hands behind him he paced
one reviews the past and plans for the future. Prince Andrew's face
of reflection are generally in a serious frame of mind. At such moments
When starting on a journey or changing their mode of life, men capable

cloth covers carefully tied with tapes.
effects of Prince Andrew's were in very good order: new, clean, and in
who had brought it from the siege of Ochakov. All these traveling
silver plate, two Turkish pistols and a saber--a present from his father
with him remained in his room; a small box, a large canteen fitted with
ordered the horses to be harnessed. Only those things he always kept
After inspecting the carriage himself and seeing the trunks put in, he
epaulettes had been packing with his valet in the rooms assigned to him.
her sister-in-law's room. Prince Andrew in a traveling coat without
his routine, retired as usual after dinner. The little princess was in
Prince Andrew was to leave next evening. The old prince, not altering

CHAPTER XXVIII




"Oh, he is so kind!" answered Princess Mary.

afraid of him."
"What a clever man your father is," said she; "perhaps that is why I am

sister-in-law's arm and drew her into another room.
law and now at Princess Mary. When they left the table she took her
dinner sat silent, glancing with a frightened look now at her father-in-
The little princess during the whole discussion and the rest of the

laugh still more so, he quitted the table.
"Dieu sait quand reviendra..." hummed the prince out of tune and, with a

"You know, Prince, I am not a Bonapartist!"

excellent French.
another admirer of that powder-monkey emperor of yours," he exclaimed in
"Well, then go to your Buonaparte! Mademoiselle Bourienne, here's

"That would take too long to tell," answered the son.

skill?" he concluded.
night. Come now, where has this great commander of yours shown his
affairs?" concluded his father. "But it troubles me. I don't sleep at
"You think I'm an old man and don't understand the present state of

political events.
discuss so minutely and acutely all the recent European military and
old man, living alone in the country for so many years, could know and
listened, refraining from a reply, and involuntarily wondered how this
presented he was as little able as his father to change his opinion. He
made no rejoinder, but it was evident that whatever arguments were
him, Bonaparte had made in his campaigns and even in politics. His son
And the prince began explaining all the blunders which, according to

his reputation fighting them."
has beaten the Germans. They beat no one--except one another. He made
idlers have failed to beat the Germans. Since the world began everybody
splendid soldiers. Besides he began by attacking Germans. And only
"Buonaparte was born with a silver spoon in his mouth. He has got

The prince again laughed his frigid laugh.

"To be sure, your excellency," replied the architect.

Buonaparte was a great tactician? Here, he says the same thing."
with his roast meat, hoped he had been forgotten: "Didn't I tell you
"Michael Ivanovich!" cried the old prince to the architect who, busy

you like, but all the same Bonaparte is a great general!"
am only surprised at your opinion of Bonaparte. You may laugh as much as
"I don't at all say that all the plans are good," said Prince Andrew, "I

Buonaparte has become a great commander among them! Hm!..."
outlived mine. May God help you, but we'll see what will happen.
Germans? No, lad, either you fellows have all lost your wits, or I have
service.... "Wonderful!... Were the Potemkins, Suvorovs, and Orlovs
alluding to the invitation made that year to Moreau to enter the Russian
sent to New York in America, to fetch the Frenchman, Moreau," he said,
that birds of a feather may fight together. The German, Pahlen, has been
won't get on against Buonaparte; you'll have to call in the French, so
Michael Kutuzov? No, my dear boy," he continued, "you and your generals
kriegs-wurst-Raths are! Suvorov couldn't manage them so what chance has
devil himself! When you get there you'll find out what those Hofs-
Hofs-kriegs-wurst-schnapps-Rath on his hands. It would have puzzled the
have been a prisoner if Suvorov had had a free hand; but he had the
Prince Andrew. Two... Frederick and Suvorov; Moreau!... Moreau would
away his plate, which Tikhon briskly caught. "Suvorov!... Consider,
"Who told you that? Who?" cried the prince. "Suvorov!" And he jerked

escape?"
into a trap Moreau set him, and from which he did not know how to
"The past always seems good," said he, "but did not Suvorov himself fall

with evident pleasure.
father's ridicule of the new men, and drew him on and listened to him
pretending to do something real. Prince Andrew gaily bore with his
a sort of puppet show at which the men of the day were playing,
there were no political difficulties in Europe and no real war, but only
Potemkins or Suvorovs left to oppose him; but he was also convinced that
little Frenchy, successful only because there were no longer any
B C of war or of politics, and that Bonaparte was an insignificant
only that all the men of the day were mere babies who did not know the A
generals and statesmen of the day. The old prince seemed convinced not
And the conversation again turned on the war, on Bonaparte, and the

architect.
"He is a great tactician!" said the prince to his son, pointing to the

young prince, wondering what would follow.
which to hang the prince's favorite topic, he looked inquiringly at the
things about Bonaparte, but understanding that he was wanted as a peg on
Michael Ivanovich did not at all know when "you and I" had said such

thought much of him."
what forces are being collected against him! While you and I never
Prince Andrew" (he always spoke thus of his son) "has been telling me
"Well, Michael Ivanovich, our Bonaparte will be having a bad time of it.

definite idea of her, he turned away and addressed Michael Ivanovich.
and suddenly, as if he had studied her sufficiently and had formed a
As she became animated the prince looked at her more and more sternly,

her eyes out," she said, growing more and more lively.
"Countess Apraksina, poor thing, has lost her husband and she has cried

from various people and retelling the town gossip.
she became still more animated and chattered away giving him greetings
she began to smile and talk. He asked about mutual acquaintances, and
silent and seemed confused. The prince asked her about her father, and
The little princess did not, or did not wish to, hear his words. She was

"You must walk, walk as much as possible, as much as possible," he said.

and not with his eyes.
He laughed in his usual dry, cold, unpleasant way, with his lips only

"You've been in a hurry. That's bad!"
"Ho, ho!" said the old man, casting his eyes on her rounded figure.

the chair for her.
He indicated a place beside him to his daughter-in-law. A footman moved

down! Sit down, Michael Ianovich!"
eyes, and then quickly went to his place and sat down. "Sit down, sit
"I'm glad, glad, to see you," he said, looking attentively into her

her neck.
him. He stroked her hair and then patted her awkwardly on the back of
sensation of fear and respect which the old man inspired in all around
the little princess. She felt, as courtiers do when the Tsar enters, the
their thick, bushy eyebrows sternly scanned all present and rested on
room. The prince stood still; his lively glittering eyes from under
struck two and another with a shrill tone joined in from the drawing
with the strict formality of his house. At that moment the great clock
his wont, as if intentionally contrasting the briskness of his manners
coming from the study. The prince walked in quickly and jauntily as was
criticism and was about to reply, when the expected footsteps were heard
Princess Mary could not understand the boldness of her brother's

his powerful mind, indulging in such nonsense!"
"Everyone has his Achilles' heel," continued Prince Andrew. "Fancy, with

reverence and was beyond question.
what he was laughing at. Everything her father did inspired her with
Princess Mary looked at her brother in surprise. She did not understand

come up to him.
"How thoroughly like him that is!" he said to Princess Mary, who had

a portrait so characteristic of the original as to be amusing.
genealogical tree, shook his head, laughing as a man laughs who looks at
ancestor of the Bolkonskis. Prince Andrew, looking again at that
of a ruling prince, in a crown--an alleged descendant of Rurik and
portrait (evidently by the hand of the artist belonging to the estate)
Bolkonski, opposite which hung another such frame with a badly painted
gilt frame, new to him, containing the genealogical tree of the Princes
by which the prince was to enter. Prince Andrew was looking at a large
signs to the footmen, and anxiously glancing from the clock to the door
butler, napkin on arm, was scanning the setting of the table, making
behind each chair--stood waiting for the prince to enter. The head
exceedingly lofty, the members of the household and the footmen--one
In the dining room, which like all the rooms in the house was

taciturn Michael Ivanovich more often than to anyone else.
a whit worse than you or I." At dinner the prince usually spoke to the
more than once impressed on his daughter that Michael Ivanovich was "not
handkerchief) to illustrate the theory that all men are equals, and had
Ivanovich (who always went into a corner to blow his nose on his checked
government officials to his table, had unexpectedly selected Michael
very strictly to social distinctions and rarely admitted even important
not have caused him to expect that honor. The prince, who generally kept
position of that insignificant individual was such as could certainly
a strange caprice of his employer's was admitted to table though the
Bourienne were already awaiting him together with his architect, who by
dining room where his daughter-in-law, Princess Mary, and Mademoiselle
At the appointed hour the prince, powdered and shaven, entered the

CHAPTER XXVII




"Dieu sait quand reviendra. Go to the dining room."

meditatively and rapidly:
"Well, you've told me nothing new," and the old man repeated,

this one."
you what it is. Napoleon has also formed his plan by now, not worse than
"I don't say it's a plan I approve of," said the son; "I am only telling

His son only smiled.

* "Marlborough is going to the wars; God knows when he'll return."


"Malbrook s'en va-t-en guerre. Dieu sait quand reviendra." *
description. The old man began to sing, in the cracked voice of old age:
The third interruption came when Prince Andrew was finishing his

said: "That's bad! Go on, go on."
"And will she soon be confined?" and shaking his head reproachfully

Another time he interrupted, saying:
This meant that Tikhon was not handing him the waistcoat he wanted.

white one, the white one!"
times unexpectedly interrupted. Once he stopped it by shouting: "The
not listening to it continued to dress while walking about, and three
not evince the least interest during this explanation, but as if he were
men was to attack the French from different sides. The old prince did
were to land at Naples, and how a total force of five hundred thousand
Italy and on the Rhine; how fifty thousand Russians and as many English
thousand Austrians, with a hundred thousand Russians, were to operate in
to join some Swedish forces at Stralsund; how two hundred and twenty
of her neutrality and draw her into the war; how part of that army was
ninety thousand strong, was to threaten Prussia so as to bring her out
the plan of operation for the coming campaign. He explained how an army,
changing unconsciously from Russian to French as he went on--to explain
reluctantly, but gradually with more and more animation, and from habit
Prince Andrew, seeing that his father insisted, began--at first

clothing. "What of Sweden? How will they cross Pomerania?"
followed by Tikhon, who ran after him, handing him different articles of
Austria?" said he, rising from his chair and pacing up and down the room
the southern army to do? Prussia is neutral... I know that. What about
understand--Tolstoy's too... a simultaneous expedition.... But what's
I am glad to have her. Sit down and talk. About Mikhelson's army I
over, and they'll talk nineteen to the dozen. That's their woman's way!
for your wife is ready. Princess Mary will take her there and show her
whether it was firmly plaited, and grasping his by the hand. "The house
"Nonsense, nonsense!" cried the old man, shaking his pigtail to see

honoring him. "Why, I have not yet had time to settle down!"
showed that his father's foibles did not prevent his son from loving and
"Give me time to collect my wits, Father," said he, with a smile that

Prince Andrew smiled.

by this new science you call 'strategy.'"
his hobby; "tell me how the Germans have taught you to fight Bonaparte
"God has nothing to do with it! Well, go on," he continued, returning to

"Thank God," said his son smiling.

morning till night and abstemious, so of course I am well."
"Only fools and rakes fall ill, my boy. You know me: I am busy from

an eager and respectful look. "How is your health?"
said Prince Andrew, following every movement of his father's face with
"Yes, Father, I have come to you and brought my wife who is pregnant,"

Bonaparte.
making fun of the military men of the day, and more particularly of
indicated to him. He made no reply on his father's favorite topic--
eyebrows. Prince Andrew went up and kissed his father on the spot
cast happy, sidelong glances at his son from under his thick, bushy
to say that a nap "after dinner was silver--before dinner, golden.") He
The old man was in a good temper after his nap before dinner. (He used

his cheek.
he'll soon have us, too, for his subjects! How are you?" And he held out
"You at least must tackle him properly, or else if he goes on like this

holding fast to plait, would allow.
man, shaking his powdered head as much as the tail, which Tikhon was
"Ah! here's the warrior! Wants to vanquish Buonaparte?" said the old

chair, wrapped in a powdering mantle, entrusting his head to Tikhon.
he talked to Pierre), the old man was sitting on a large leather-covered
manner he wore in drawing rooms, but with the animated face with which
entered his father's dressing room (not with the contemptuous look and
style, wearing an antique coat and powdered hair; and when Prince Andrew
dressed for dinner. The old prince always dressed in old-fashioned
son's arrival: he gave orders to admit him to his apartments while he
The old man made a departure from his usual routine in honor of his
prince to get up, Tikhon came to call the young prince to his father.
When the twenty minutes had elapsed and the time had come for the old

geometry were among the greatest delights of her life.
geometry lessons," said Princess Mary gleefully, as if her lessons in
"The hours are the same, and the lathe, and also the mathematics and my

aware of his weaknesses.
showed that, in spite of all his love and respect for his father, he was
lathe?" asked Prince Andrew with a scarcely perceptible smile which
"And are the hours the same? And the walks in the avenues? And the

answered the princess joyfully.
"Yes, just the same. Though I don't know what your opinion will be,"

Take her to your room and I'll go to Father. How is he? Just the same?"
"She needs rest," said Prince Andrew with a frown. "Don't you, Lise?

unexpectedly again began to cry.
Her lip descended. She brought her face close to her sister-in-law's and

quite certain. Ah! it is very dreadful..."
The face of the little princess changed. She sighed and said: "Yes,

"Is it certain?" she said.

thought turned to her sister-in-law with a tender glance at her figure.
Princess Mary did not listen to the end, but continuing her train of

promotion..."
"He is leaving me here, God knows why, when he might have had

"Yes, and even tomorrow," replied her brother.

Lise sighed too.

"So you are really going to the war, Andrew?" she said sighing.

description of the last Petersburg fete she addressed her brother:
thought independent of her sister-in-law's words. In the midst of a
of love and sadness. It was plain that she was following a train of
still looking silently at her brother and her beautiful eyes were full
a real one, but that they would talk of that later. Princess Mary was
Odyntsova had married an old man, and that there was a suitor for Mary,
to dress in here; and that Andrew had quite changed, and that Kitty
all her clothes in Petersburg and that heaven knew what she would have
condition, and immediately after that informed them that she had left
had on the Spasski Hill which might have been serious for her in her
glittering teeth and sparkling eyes. She told of an accident they had
drawing up again next moment when her face broke into a smile of
continually and rapidly touching her rosy nether lip when necessary and
The little princess talked incessantly, her short, downy upper lip

rested on Prince Andrew's face.
gentle look of her large luminous eyes, very beautiful at that moment,
turned toward her brother, and through her tears the loving, warm,
told her she was still the same crybaby as ever. Princess Mary had
Prince Andrew and his sister, hand in hand, kissed one another, and he

see you."
"And I had no idea!..." exclaimed Princess Mary. "Ah, Andrew, I did not

"I knew the princess at once," put in Mademoiselle Bourienne.

you have got thinner?..." "And you have grown stouter!..."
"I dreamed last night..."--"You were not expecting us?..." "Ah! Mary,
"Ah! my dear!... Ah! Mary!" they suddenly exclaimed, and then laughed.

heads that it could have been otherwise at this meeting.
natural that they should cry, and apparently it never entered their
Andrew evidently felt ill at ease, but to the two women it seemed quite
cry and kissed again. Mademoiselle Bourienne also began to cry. Prince
other on the face, and then to Prince Andrew's surprise both began to
hands, kissing them and pulling them away, and again began kissing each
another, and then, as if afraid of being too late, seized each other's
music do when they hear a false note. The two women let go of one
laugh. Prince Andrew shrugged his shoulders and frowned, as lovers of
heart, with a beatific smile and obviously equally ready to cry or to
touch. Mademoiselle Bourienne stood near them pressing her hand to her
arms warmly pressing their lips to whatever place they happened to
met once before for a short time at his wedding, were in each other's
of kissing. When Prince Andrew went in the two princesses, who had only
middle, a cry was heard, then Princess Mary's heavy tread and the sound
The little princess entered the room. The passage broke off in the

made a grimace, as if expecting something unpleasant.
of the oft-repeated passage of the sonata. Prince Andrew stopped and
They went up to the door of the sitting room from which came the sound

friendship for you. She was not expecting us?"
princess, kissing her. "I know you already through my sister-in-law's
"No, no, please not... You are Mademoiselle Bourienne," said the little

know."
"Ah! what joy for the princess!" exclaimed she: "At last! I must let her

rushed out apparently beside herself with delight.
came, the pretty, fair haired Frenchwoman, Mademoiselle Bourienne,
Before they reached the room from which the sounds of the clavichord

kissed his hand.
"You've grown older, Tikhon," he said in passing to the old man, who

Prince Andrew followed her with a courteous but sad expression.

"Is that Mary practicing? Let's go quietly and take her by surprise."

her husband, and at the footman who accompanied them.
come, quick, quick!" And with a glance round, she smiled at Tikhon, at
the expression with which people compliment their host at a ball. "Let's
"Why, this is a palace!" she said to her husband, looking around with

merrily and prettily as ever.
her short, downy, smiling lip lifted when she began to speak just as
The little princess had grown stouter during this time, but her eyes and

said.
"He will get up in twenty minutes. Let us go across to Mary's room," he

wife.
last, and, having assured himself that they had not, he turned to his
ascertain whether his father's habits had changed since he was at home
apparently knew this as well as Tikhon; he looked at his watch as if to
must be allowed to disturb the appointed order of the day. Prince Andrew
Tikhon knew that neither the son's arrival nor any other unusual event
whisper that the prince was sleeping, and hastily closed the door.
a wig, put his head out of the door of the antechamber, reported in a
alight, and let her pass into the house before him. Old Tikhon, wearing
porch. Prince Andrew got out of the carriage, helped his little wife to
Just then a closed carriage and another with a hood drove up to the

times repeated--of a sonata by Dussek.
through the closed doors came the sound of difficult passages--twenty
the prince, who was in his large study. From the far side of the house
The gray-haired valet was sitting drowsily listening to the snoring of

CHAPTER XXVI




clavichord.
was mapped out, the prince rested and the princess played the
room with a look of alarm. Between twelve and two o'clock, as the day
late in starting her practice on the clavichord, went into the sitting
The princess glanced at her watch and, seeing that she was five minutes

and would not have others do so."
warn me of the humor my father is in. I do not allow myself to judge him
"Ah, dear friend," replied Princess Mary, "I have asked you never to

a very bad humor, very morose. Be prepared."
grasseyement, "the prince has been scolding Michael Ivanovich. He is in
listening to herself with pleasure, and speaking with exaggerated
"Princess, I must warn you," she added, lowering her voice and evidently

quite different atmosphere, careless, lighthearted, and self-satisfied.
She brought into Princess Mary's strenuous, mournful, and gloomy world a
Bourienne rapidly, in her pleasant mellow tones and with guttural r's.
mine. I have written to my poor mother," said the smiling Mademoiselle
"Ah, you are sending off a letter, Princess? I have already dispatched

MARY

Mother keep you in their holy and all-powerful care!
Adieu, dear and kind friend; may our divine Saviour and His most Holy

another.
and that men attribute the greatest merit to skill in killing one
of its divine Saviour, Who preached love and forgiveness of injuries--
have heard the sobs. It seems as though mankind has forgotten the laws
the mothers, wives, and children of the men who were going and should
people and starting to join the army. You should have seen the state of
heartrending scene.... It was a convoy of conscripts enrolled from our
yesterday during my daily walk through the village I witnessed a
countermarches, things of which I understand nothing; and the day before
painfully felt. My father talks of nothing but marches and
consider characteristic of the country--rumors of war are heard and
even here amid fieldwork and the calm of nature--which townsfolk
are--at the heart of affairs and of the world--is the talk all of war,
into which we have been drawn, God knows how or why. Not only where you
however, for he will leave us again to take part in this unhappy war
Bald Hills with his wife. This pleasure will be but a brief one,
I have had a letter from my brother, who announces his speedy arrival at

toward him whom He may give me for husband.
faithfully as I can, without disquieting myself by examining my feelings
duties of wife and mother upon me I shall try to perform them as
conform. However painful it may be to me, should the Almighty lay the
friend, that I look on marriage as a divine institution to which we must
regard to this project of marriage for me, I will tell you, dear sweet
has received a letter and is expecting a visit from Prince Vasili. In
My father has not spoken to me of a suitor, but has only told me that he

vouchsafe its revelation to us through His divine Spirit.
what He has been pleased to conceal from us, the sooner will He
knowledge that does not come from Him; and the less we seek to fathom
human minds roam, the better we shall please God, who rejects all
follow them, and let us be persuaded that the less we let our feeble
left for our guidance here below. Let us try to conform to them and
ourselves to studying those sublime rules which our divine Saviour has
impenetrable veil between us and the Eternal? Let us rather confine
holy secrets of Providence while we remain in this flesh which forms an
for how can we, miserable sinners that we are, know the terrible and
and Gospels. Let us not seek to penetrate what mysteries they contain;
quite contrary to Christian simplicity. Let us rather read the Epistles
doubts and excite their imagination, giving them a bent for exaggeration
their minds by dwelling on mystical books that merely awaken their
I never could understand the fondness some people have for confusing
time in reading what is unintelligible and can therefore bear no fruit.
human understanding cannot grasp, it seems to me rather useless to spend
tell me that among some good things it contains others which our weak
you have sent me and which has such success in Moscow. Yet since you
than the poorest beggar. A thousand thanks, dear friend, for the volume
If I were asked what I desire most on earth, it would be to be poorer
and burdened with such riches--to what temptations he will be exposed!
true. I pity Prince Vasili but am still more sorry for Pierre. So young,
a needle than for a rich man to enter the Kingdom of God, are terribly
Saviour's words, that it is easier for a camel to go through the eye of
Vasili, it is very sad for both. Ah, my dear friend, our divine
most in people. As to his inheritance and the part played by Prince
seemed to me to have an excellent heart, and that is the quality I value
I cannot agree with you about Pierre, whom I knew as a child. He always

possible. God preserve us from that terrible misfortune!
now, but that he will do all he can to let his turn come as late as
representative but one of the great century, and that it is his own turn
father was much affected by it. He says the count was the last
The news of Count Bezukhov's death reached us before your letter and my

inspire in a romantic and loving young girl like yourself.
and better than the feelings which the beautiful eyes of a young man can
love, love of one's neighbor, love of one's enemy, is worthier, sweeter,
them, neither do I condemn them. Only it seems to me that Christian
feelings in others, and if never having felt them I cannot approve of
man? On such matters I am only severe with myself. I understand such
suppose that I should look severely on your affection for that young
had not religion to console us life would be very sad. Why do you
dared complain, I who am deprived of all who are dear to me? Ah, if we
on you. You complain of our separation. What then should I say, if I
you say so much that is bad, does not seem to have had its usual effect
delight. So you still love me, my romantic Julie? Separation, of which
Dear and precious Friend, Your letter of the 13th has given me great

also in French:
paper and her hand moved rapidly over it. This is the reply she wrote,
rose and with her heavy tread went up to the table. She took a sheet of
eyes lit up so that her face was entirely transformed. Then she suddenly
The princess pondered awhile with a thoughtful smile and her luminous

P.S. Let me have news of your brother and his charming little wife.

JULIE

Bourienne. I embrace you as I love you.
respects to monsieur your father and my compliments to Mademoiselle
is an admirable book which calms and elevates the soul. Adieu! Give my
there are things in it difficult for the feeble human mind to grasp, it
mystical book I am sending you; it has an enormous success here. Though
Mamma has sent for me to go and dine at the Apraksins'. Read the
But enough of gossip. I am at the end of my second sheet of paper, and

scapegrace. That is all I have been able to find out about him.
you know of it. He is said to be very handsome and a terrible
I don't know what you will think of it, but I consider it my duty to let
and distinguee, and it is on you that his relations' choice has fallen.
son Anatole, whom they wish to reform by marrying him to someone rich
marriage for you. It is neither more nor less than with Prince Vasili's
Anna Mikhaylovna told me, under the seal of strict secrecy, of a plan of
propos of marriages: do you know that a while ago that universal auntie
Bezukhova. But you will understand that I have no desire for the post. A
matchmaking chronicles of Moscow now speak of me as the future Countess
finding husbands for me (most of whom I don't even know), the
fellow. As for the past two years people have amused themselves by
though, between you and me, he always seemed to me a poor sort of
marriageable daughters, and of the young ladies themselves, toward him,
watch the change in the tone and manners of the mammas burdened by
owner of one of the largest fortunes in Russia, I am much amused to
to know as plain Monsieur Pierre, has become Count Bezukhov and the
inheritance; but I do know that since this young man, whom we all used
I confess I understand very little about all these matters of wills and

quite crestfallen.
a very despicable part in this affair and that he returned to Petersburg
of the finest fortune in Russia. It is rumored that Prince Vasili played
recognized as legitimate; so that he is now Count Bezukhov and possessor
Pierre who has inherited all the property and has besides been
have received very little, Prince Vasili nothing, and it is Monsieur
old Count Bezukhov, and his inheritance. Fancy! The three princesses
this! The chief news, about which all Moscow gossips, is the death of
this poetic and pure intimacy, were what my heart needed. But enough of
young ever to be more to me than a friend, but this sweet friendship,
generally the stronger! I know very well that Count Nicholas is too
these poignant joys and sorrows. You are fortunate, for the latter are
That is still too fresh. Ah, dear friend, you are happy not to know
Someday I will tell you about our parting and all that was said then.
sweetest comforts to my poor heart, which has already suffered so much.
relations with him, transient as they were, have been one of the
he is so frank and has so much heart. He is so pure and poetic that my
one seldom finds nowadays among our old men of twenty and, particularly,
last summer, is so noble-minded and full of that real youthfulness which
army was a great grief to me. This young man, of whom I spoke to you
you, dear Mary, that in spite of his extreme youth his departure for the
inactive and has left the university to join the army. I will confess to
young Nicholas Rostov, who with his enthusiasm could not bear to remain
war has deprived me of one of the associations nearest my heart. I mean
goodness, to give us as sovereign! To say nothing of my brothers, this
overthrown by the angel whom it has pleased the Almighty, in His
that the Corsican monster who is destroying the peace of Europe may be
intends to expose his precious person to the chances of war. God grant
the frontier. Our dear Emperor has left Petersburg and it is thought
abroad, the other is with the Guards, who are starting on their march to
All Moscow talks of nothing but war. One of my two brothers is already

reading:
unnatural expression as soon as she looked in a glass. She went on
not thinking of herself. As with everyone, her face assumed a forced
the beautiful expression of her own eyes--the look they had when she was
attraction more powerful than that of beauty. But the princess never saw
that very often in spite of the plainness of her face they gave her an
times there radiated from them shafts of warm light)--were so beautiful
friend, the princess' eyes--large, deep and luminous (it seemed as if at
turning away and continuing to read. But Julie did not flatter her
at her reflection in the glass. "She flatters me," thought the princess,
thin face. Her eyes, always sad, now looked with particular hopelessness
which stood on her right. It reflected a weak, ungraceful figure and
Having read thus far, Princess Mary sighed and glanced into the mirror

as I write?
calm, and penetrating, a look I loved so well and seem to see before me
three months ago, draw fresh moral strength from your look, so gentle,
study, on the blue sofa, the confidential sofa? Why cannot I now, as
parted. Why are we not together as we were last summer, in your big
overcome a certain secret sorrow that has been in my heart ever since we
fate and in spite of the pleasures and distractions around me I cannot
our hearts are united by indissoluble bonds, my heart rebels against
are wrapped up in you, and that in spite of the distance separating us
separation! Though I tell myself that half my life and half my happiness
Dear and precious Friend, How terrible and frightful a thing is

Julie wrote in French:

day party.
childhood; that same Julie Karagina who had been at the Rostovs' name-
the seal of her letter. It was from her most intimate friend from
her father was tidy. She put down the geometry book and eagerly broke
which was littered with books and papers. The princess was as untidy as
sat down at her writing table, on which stood miniature portraits and
rarely left her and which made her plain, sickly face yet plainer. She
Princess Mary went back to her room with the sad, scared expression that

He patted her on the shoulder and himself closed the door after her.

at it. Take it. Well, now go. Go."
you. Religious! I don't interfere with anyone's belief... I have looked
"Here is some sort of Key to the Mysteries that your Heloise has sent

book from the high desk.
She turned to go, but he stopped her with a gesture and took an uncut

head."
and he patted her cheek. "It will drive all the nonsense out of your
to have you like our silly ladies. Get used to it and you'll like it,"
was about to leave: "Mathematics are most important, madam! I don't want
having taken and closed the exercise book with the next day's lesson,
"This won't do, Princess; it won't do," said he, when Princess Mary,

He drew up his chair, and continued to explain.

lightly touched his daughter's hair and sat down again.
and turning sharply away; but rising immediately, he paced up and down,
"Well now, isn't she a fool!" shouted the prince, pushing the book aside

The princess gave a wrong answer.

flung the exercise book away.
vehement, but almost always did become vehement, scolded, and sometimes
backward and forward, made efforts to control himself and not become
was beside himself: moved the chair on which he was sitting noisily
quickly to her own room to make out the problem in peace. The old man
breath and the smell of him, and could think only of how to get away
only conscious of her stern father's withered face close to her, of his
eyes grew dim, she could not see and could not hear anything, but was
fault or the pupil's, this same thing happened every day: the princess'
explanations, however clear they might be. Whether it was the teacher's
would prevent her understanding any of her father's further
plain that she understood nothing and was so frightened that her fear
close to her; the red patches on her face came and went, and it was
The princess looked in a scared way at her father's eyes glittering

are equal; please note that the angle ABC..."
and tobacco, which she had known so long. "Now, madam, these triangles
she felt herself surrounded on all sides by the acrid scent of old age
and placing an arm on the back of the chair on which she sat, so that
"Well, madam," he began, stooping over the book close to his daughter

exercise book containing geometrical figures.
letter away, and leaning his elbows on the table he drew toward him the
"The third, I said the third!" cried the prince abruptly, pushing the

and holding out the letter.
"Read this if you like, Father," said the princess, blushing still more

third!"
prince sternly; "I'm afraid you write much nonsense. I'll read the
"I'll let two more letters pass, but the third I'll read," said the

timid smile.
"Yes, it's from Julie," replied the princess with a timid glance and a

sound, yellowish teeth.
"From Heloise?" asked the prince with a cold smile that showed his still

princess' face. She took it quickly and bent her head over it.
At the sight of the letter red patches showed themselves on the

onto which he threw it.
a letter addressed in a woman's hand from a bag hanging above the table,
"Wait a bit, here's a letter for you," said the old man suddenly, taking

The princess bent over the exercise book on the table.

from one paragraph to another with his hard nail.
"For tomorrow!" said he, quickly finding the page and making a scratch

with his foot.
containing lessons in geometry written by himself and drew up a chair
"Quite well? All right then, sit down." He took the exercise book

her tenderly and attentively, said severely:
so he simply held out his bristly cheek (as yet unshaven) and, regarding
the table, summoned his daughter. He never gave his children a blessing,
dropped it into a leather pouch attached to the lathe, and, approaching
of the lathe he removed his foot from the pedal, wiped his chisel,
tenacious endurance and vigor of hardy old age. After a few more turns
the lean sinewy hand, showed that the prince still possessed the
shod in a Tartar boot embroidered with silver, and the firm pressure of
continuous, varied, and orderly activity. The motion of the small foot
tools laid ready to hand and shavings scattered around--all indicated
standing up, on which lay an open exercise book, and the lathe with
bookcases with keys in the locks, the high desk for writing while
large table covered with books and plans, the tall glass-fronted
The enormous study was full of things evidently in constant use. The

continued his work.
entrance. The prince was working at the lathe and after glancing round
opened the door which moved noiselessly and easily. She paused at the
Through the door came the regular hum of a lathe. The princess timidly

quietly and said in a whisper: "Please walk in."
An old powdered manservant who was sitting in the antechamber rose

prayed that the daily interview might pass off well.
silent prayer. Every morning she came in like that, and every morning
morning greeting, crossing herself with trepidation and repeating a
Mary entered the antechamber as usual at the time appointed for the
On the morning of the day that the young couple were to arrive, Princess

youthfully glittering eyes.
eyebrows which, when he frowned, sometimes hid the gleam of his shrewd,
small old man, with powdered wig, small withered hands, and bushy gray
the enormously high study door opened and showed the figure of a rather
antechamber experienced the same feeling of respect and even fear when
appeared punctually to the appointed hour. Everyone sitting in this
just as the architect, gardener, or Princess Mary did, till the prince
considered it his duty to visit him and waited in the lofty antechamber
official appointed to the province in which the prince's estate lay
in retirement and had now no influence in political affairs, every high
and respect as few hardhearted men would have aroused. Although he was
exacting, so that without being a hardhearted man he inspired such fear
him, from his daughter to his serfs, the prince was sharp and invariably
and not only at the same hour but at the same minute. With those about
exactitude. He always came to table under precisely the same conditions,
regularity in his household was carried to the highest point of
at his estate. As regularity is a prime condition facilitating activity,
in the garden, or superintending the building that was always going on
problems in higher mathematics, turning snuffboxes on a lathe, working
occupied. He was himself always occupied: writing his memoirs, solving
she was twenty, and arranged her life so that her whole time was
cardinal virtues in her gave her lessons in algebra and geometry till
himself undertook his daughter's education, and to develop these two
superstition, and only two virtues--activity and intelligence. He
that there are only two sources of human vice--idleness and
Bald Hills, while he himself needed no one and nothing. He used to say
anyone who wanted to see him could come the hundred miles from Moscow to
capitals, he still continued to live in the country, remarking that
Bourienne. Though in the new reign he was free to return to the
with his daughter, Princess Mary, and her companion, Mademoiselle
Paul had exiled him to his country estate had lived there continuously
(nicknamed in society, "the King of Prussia") ever since the Emperor
prince's household. General in Chief Prince Nicholas Andreevich
expectation did not upset the regular routine of life in the old
arrival of young Prince Andrew and his wife was daily expected, but this
At Bald Hills, Prince Nicholas Andreevich Bolkonski's estate, the

CHAPTER XXV




whispers and as a great secret.
the eldest princess and Prince Vasili she spoke disapprovingly, but in
men as the old count and his worthy son," said she. Of the behavior of
"It is painful, but it does one good. It uplifts the soul to see such
though he tried hard to hide it in order not to sadden his dying father.
Pierre, whom it had been pitiful to see, so stricken was he with grief,
everybody at last and had spoken such pathetic words to the son, or
during those awful moments--the father who so remembered everything and
not think of it without tears, and did not know which had behaved better
last meeting between father and son, it was so touching that she could
wish to die, that his end was not only touching but edifying. As to the
Count Bezukhov's death. She said the count had died as she would herself
morning she told the Rostovs and all her acquaintances the details of
Mikhaylovna returned to the Rostovs' and went to bed. On waking in the
silence at Princess Anna Mikhaylovna. After her talk with Pierre, Anna
Pierre understood nothing of all this and coloring shyly looked in

time. I hope, my dear friend, you will carry out your father's wish?"
me only the day before yesterday not to forget Boris. But he had no
there, God only knows what would have happened! You know, Uncle promised
"Perhaps later on I may tell you, my dear boy, that if I had not been

Pierre was silent.

duties on you, and you must be a man."
enough to be sure that this will not turn your head, but it imposes
an immense fortune. The will has not yet been opened. I know you well
God will support you: you are young, and are now, I hope, in command of
"Yes, my dear, this is a great loss for us all, not to speak of you. But

In the morning Anna Mikhaylovna said to Pierre:

fast asleep with his head on his arm.
see his face. Anna Mikhaylovna left him, and when she returned he was
She led him into the dark drawing room and Pierre was glad no one could

tears."
"Come, I will go with you. Try to weep, nothing gives such relief as

Pierre looked at her over his spectacles.

"He is no more...."

forehead, wetting him with her tears. Then after a pause she said:
Pierre gave her an inquiring look. She kissed the young man on his

"Pierre!" she said.

steps.
Anna Mikhaylovna came out last. She approached Pierre with slow, quiet

awful..." and he burst into tears.
near sixty, dear friend... I too... All will end in death, all! Death is
before. "How often we sin, how much we deceive, and all for what? I am
his voice a sincerity and weakness Pierre had never observed in it
"Ah, my friend!" said he, taking Pierre by the elbow; and there was in

ague.
noticed that he was pale and that his jaw quivered and shook as if in an
sitting and dropped onto it, covering his face with his hand. Pierre
Prince Vasili came next. He staggered to the sofa on which Pierre was

handkerchief and rushed from the room.
waiting for." And bursting into tears she hid her face in her
"Yes, now you may be glad!" said she; "this is what you have been

irrepressible hatred.
biting her underlip. At sight of Pierre her expression showed an
minutes later the eldest sister came out with a pale hard face, again
princess and Prince Vasili, recovering themselves, followed her. A few
caught up the object of contention and ran into the bedroom. The eldest
Her sister dropped the portfolio. Anna Mikhaylovna, stooping, quickly

me alone with him!"
"What are you doing!" she cried vehemently. "He is dying and you leave

wringing her hands.
against the wall, and the second of the three sisters rushed out
which had always opened so quietly, burst noisily open and banged
At this moment that terrible door, which Pierre had watched so long and

Prince Vasili bent his head and spread out his hands.

Mikhaylovna and snatching the portfolio from her.
"Vile woman!" shouted the princess, darting unexpectedly at Anna

severely. "You don't know what you are doing."
"Remember that you will answer for the consequences," said Prince Vasili

dignity, and at the twitching cheeks of Prince Vasili.
with astonishment at the angry face of the princess which had lost all
she, turning to the young man who, having come quite close, was gazing
allow him a moment's peace! Here, Pierre, tell them your opinion," said
"But, Prince," said Anna Mikhaylovna, "after such a solemn sacrament,

and ask him, I!... does that satisfy you?"
"Let go, I tell you! I will take the responsibility. I myself will go

But Anna Mikhaylovna did not obey him.

"And you too!"

The princess let go.

absurd! Come, let go I tell you."
Prince Vasili rose. "Oh!" said he with reproach and surprise, "this is

portfolio, and changed her grip.
But Anna Mikhaylovna went forward a step or two to keep her hold on the

hissed viciously, and tugged with all her might at the portfolio.
a scene on the very threshold of a dying man's room? Intriguer!" she
remain silent when heaven knows who permits herself to interfere, making
that those in the drawing room heard her and were startled. "Why do you
"Why don't you speak, cousin?" suddenly shrieked the princess so loud

family consultation; is it not so, Prince?"
"Pierre, my dear, come here. I think he will not be out of place in a

of its honeyed firmness and softness.
Mikhaylovna. Though the latter held on tenaciously, her voice lost none
princess did speak, her words would not be flattering to Anna
portfolio were the only sounds audible, but it was evident that if the
The princess did not reply. Their efforts in the struggle for the

conjure..."
princess, I beg and implore you, have some pity on him! Je vous en
portfolio so firmly that it was plain she would not let go easily. "Dear
"I know, my dear, kind princess," said Anna Mikhaylovna, seizing the

her path.
She tried to pass Anna Mikhaylovna, but the latter sprang so as to bar

table, and this is a paper he has forgotten...."
held in her hand. "All I know is that his real will is in his writing
ladies, addressing Prince Vasili and pointing to an inlaid portfolio she
"I don't even know what is in this paper," said the younger of the two

how fond the count is of her."
"Come, my dear Anna Mikhaylovna, let Catiche do as she pleases. You know

the air of a man little concerned in what the two ladies were saying.
that they looked heavier below, were twitching violently; but he wore
one leg crossed high above the other. His cheeks, which were so flabby
Prince Vasili was seated in an easy chair in his familiar attitude, with

prepared..."
needs repose? Worldly conversation at a moment when his soul is already
from passing, "won't this be too much for poor Uncle at a moment when he
impressively, blocking the way to the bedroom and preventing the other
"But, my dear princess," answered Anna Mikhaylovna blandly but

state of excitement as when she had slammed the door of her room.
necessary," said the younger of the two speakers, evidently in the same
"Permit me, Princess, to know what is necessary and what is not

princess, and they were both speaking in excited whispers.
short interval followed her. Anna Mikhaylovna was standing beside the
princess. Pierre concluded that this also was essential, and after a
to the reception room where they had left Prince Vasili and the eldest
inquiringly at his monitress and saw that she was again going on tiptoe
not eat anything though he would very much have liked to. He looked
was happening and what was about to happen in the bedroom. Pierre did
betraying by every word and movement that they none of them forgot what
people sat there, not merrymaking, but somberly whispering, and
stood in disorder, and in the middle of the night a motley throng of
lighted by two candles. On one small table tea things and supper dishes
repeated their reflections several times. Now this same room was dimly
shoulders, looked at themselves in the brilliantly lighted mirrors which
through in their ball dresses with diamonds and pearls on their bare
had liked sitting in this room to watch the ladies who, as they passed
During balls given at the house Pierre, who did not know how to dance,
this small circular drawing room with its mirrors and little tables.
that night had gathered to fortify themselves. Pierre well remembered
circular room. Around the table all who were at Count Bezukhov's house
before a table on which tea and a cold supper were laid in the small
animation as he stood sipping tea from a delicate Chinese handleless cup
delicious Russian tea," Lorrain was saying with an air of restrained
"There is nothing so refreshing after a sleepless night as a cup of this

drawing room.
below the shoulder. Pierre went with Anna Mikhaylovna into the small
To Pierre he said nothing, merely giving his arm a sympathetic squeeze

Mikhaylovna, or you will not hold out."
Vasili to Anna Mikhaylovna. "Go and take something, my poor Anna
"Catiche has had tea served in the small drawing room," said Prince

"I can't bear the sight of that woman."

something as she whispered:
they became silent, and Pierre thought he saw the princess hide
Great and talking eagerly. As soon as they saw Pierre and his companion
eldest princess, who were sitting under the portrait of Catherine the
There was now no one in the reception room except Prince Vasili and the

CHAPTER XXIV




Pierre went out.

princesses was coming to take her turn at watching. "Let us go."
"He is dozing," said Anna Mikhaylovna, observing that one of the

sick man was turned on to his side with his face to the wall. He sighed.
in his breast and a tickling in his nose, and tears dimmed his eyes. The
helplessness. At sight of this smile Pierre felt an unexpected quivering
quite out of keeping with his features, that seemed to deride his own
and again at the arm, and on his face a feeble, piteous smile appeared,
rate he glanced at the refractory arm, at Pierre's terror-stricken face,
or whether some other thought flitted across his dying brain, at any
noticed the look of terror with which Pierre regarded that lifeless arm,
helplessly and he made a fruitless effort to pull it forward. Whether he
While the count was being turned over, one of his arms fell back

Pierre rose to help him.

turn the count's heavy body toward the wall.
"Wants to turn on the other side," whispered the servant, and got up to

stood constantly at the head of the bed.
sick man showed impatience. He made an effort to look at the servant who
inquiring whisper, then pointed to the quilt. The eyes and face of the
first to Pierre, then to some drink, then named Prince Vasili in an
at the sick man's eyes, trying to guess what he wanted; she pointed
issued an indistinct, hoarse sound. Anna Mikhaylovna looked attentively
realize how near death his father was), and from that distorted mouth
increased, the handsome mouth was drawn to one side (only now did Pierre
muscles and lines of the count's face began to twitch. The twitching
about two minutes, which to Pierre seemed an hour. Suddenly the broad
of these last moments of meeting between the father and son. This lasted
indicated by her attitude her consciousness of the pathetic importance
spot where Pierre's face had been before he sat down. Anna Mikhaylovna
as small as possible. He looked at the count, who still gazed at the
stout and clumsy body took up so much room and doing his utmost to look
symmetrical pose of an Egyptian statue, evidently distressed that his
Mikhaylovna nodded approvingly. Again Pierre fell into the naively
Pierre obediently sat down, his eyes asking if he were doing right. Anna
Mikhaylovna with her eyes indicated a chair that stood beside the bed.
questioningly at Anna Mikhaylovna to see what he was to do next. Anna
muscle of the count's face stirred. Once more Pierre looked
lips to the large boned, fleshy hand. Neither the hand nor a single
so as not to touch the quilt, followed her suggestion and pressed his
her lips as if to send it a kiss. Pierre, carefully stretching his neck
a hurried sign with her eyes, glancing at the sick man's hand and moving
what to do, and glanced inquiringly at his guide. Anna Mikhaylovna made
must look somewhere, or it meant too much. Pierre hesitated, not knowing
Either this look meant nothing but that as long as one has eyes they
look the significance of which could not be understood by mortal man.
When Pierre came up the count was gazing straight at him, but with a
were symmetrically placed on the green silk quilt, the palms downward.
completed. He lay with his head propped high on the pillows. His hands
had been laid in a stately pose in keeping with the ceremony just
and said, "Come." Pierre went with her to the bed on which the sick man
carried the sick man dispersed. Anna Mikhaylovna touched Pierre's hand
After a few minutes' bustle beside the high bedstead, those who had

nothing.
movements of the bearers, and the cold listless gaze fixed itself upon
Petersburg. But now this head was swaying helplessly with the uneven
remembered it three months before, when the count had sent him to
disfigured by the approach of death. It was the same as Pierre
its handsome, sensual mouth, and its cold, majestic expression, was not
leonine head. This head, with its remarkably broad brow and cheekbones,
those who were holding him under the armpits, and of his gray, curly,
man's high, stout, uncovered chest and powerful shoulders, raised by
caught a momentary glimpse between their heads and backs of the dying
As the bearers, among whom was Anna Mikhaylovna, passed the young man he

were carrying were too much for them.
the shuffling of their feet grew more hurried, as if the weight they
exclaimed different voices; and the heavy breathing of the bearers and
say in a frightened whisper. "Catch hold from underneath. Here!"
"Catch hold of my arm or you'll drop him!" he heard one of the servants

lifted the dying man and were moving him.
movements of those who crowded round the invalid chair that they had
single moment during the whole service. He judged by the cautious
which, though he saw other faces as well, he had not lost sight of for a
Pierre could no longer see the reddish-yellow face with its gray mane--
The sick man was so surrounded by doctors, princesses, and servants that

"Certainly he must be moved onto the bed; here it will be impossible..."

Pierre heard her say:

Anna Mikhaylovna's was the most distinct.
him everyone began to stir: steps were audible and whispers, among which
sacrament. The dying man lay as lifeless and immovable as before. Around
heard respectfully congratulating the dying man on having received the
The chanting of the service ceased, and the voice of the priest was

happening around him that evening was in some way essential.
what went on, having made up his mind once for all that what he saw
Pierre paid no more attention to this occurrence than to the rest of
to their places one after the other before the service was concluded.
Prince Vasili and the princess passed out by a back door, but returned
the high bedstead with its silken hangings. On leaving the bed both
eldest princess, and moved with her to the side of the room where stood
for them--did not go up to the dying man, but passed by him, joined the
was about and if others did not understand him it was so much the worse
had been leaning, and--with an air which intimated that he knew what he
interval Pierre noticed that Prince Vasili left the chair on which he
the people resumed their places and the service continued. During this
sick man was given something to drink, there was a stir around him, then
free, and turning sideways felt the pulse and reflected a moment. The
delicate white fingers raised from the green quilt the hand that was
man with the noiseless step of one in full vigor of life, with his
now being performed and even approved of it. He now approached the sick
of all differences of faith, understood the full importance of the rite
columns in a respectful attitude implying that he, a foreigner, in spite
back. The French doctor held no taper; he was leaning against one of the
and, stooping over the dying man, beckoned to Lorrain from behind her
up and said something to the ladies. Anna Mikhaylovna stepped forward
to one another, and the old servant who was holding the count's hand got
of the service the voices of the priests suddenly ceased, they whispered
temptation she slipped quietly behind one of the columns. In the midst
laughing, but could not resist looking at him: so to be out of
began to laugh. She evidently felt unable to look at him without
with it hidden for awhile; then looking up and seeing Pierre she again
watched him. She smiled, hid her face in her handkerchief, and remained
Sophie, the rosy, laughter-loving, youngest princess with the mole,

crossing himself with the hand that held the taper.
taper. He lit it and, distracted by observing those around him, began
about, went across the room to where Pierre was standing and gave him a
air of importance that showed that she felt she quite knew what she was
feet were the only sounds that could be heard. Anna Mikhaylovna, with an
of deep bass voices, and in the intervals sighs and the shuffling of
themselves, and the reading of the church service, the subdued chanting
men and women had separated as in church. All were silently crossing
Behind him stood the aide-de-camp, the doctors, and the menservants; the

much the worse for you!"
"If you do not understand these sentiments," he seemed to be saying, "so
His face wore a calm look of piety and resignation to the will of God.
right hand, turning his eyes upward each time he touched his forehead.
he had turned round for the purpose, and was crossing himself with his
left hand, was leaning his left arm on the carved back of a velvet chair
Vasili in front of the door, near the invalid chair, a wax taper in his
expression on her face, stood by the door near the strange lady. Prince
round. Anna Mikhaylovna, with a meek, sorrowful, and all-forgiving
declaring to all that she could not answer for herself should she glance
vicious and determined look steadily fixed on the icons, as though
eyes, and just in front of them their eldest sister, Catiche, with a
them stood the two younger princesses holding handkerchiefs to their
their hands, slowly and solemnly conducting the service. A little behind
over their magnificent glittering vestments, with lighted tapers in
in position. By the chair stood the priests, their long hair falling
thumb, and an old servant, bending over from behind the chair, held it
lying palm downwards, a wax taper had been thrust between forefinger and
his large thick hands outside the quilt. Into the right hand, which was
noble wrinkles of his handsome, ruddy face. He lay just under the icons;
forehead which reminded one of a lion, and the deep characteristically
father, Count Bezukhov, with that gray mane of hair above his broad
the waist by a bright green quilt--the familiar, majestic figure of his
white smooth pillows, evidently freshly changed, Pierre saw--covered to
gleaming icons stood a long invalid chair, and in that chair on snowy-
with red light like a Russian church during evening service. Under the
the other an immense case containing icons, was brightly illuminated
columns, with a high silk-curtained mahogany bedstead on one side and on
walls hung round with Persian carpets. The part of the room behind the
Pierre well knew this large room divided by columns and an arch, its

CHAPTER XXIII




enter that room.
followed him in, as if there were now no further need for permission to
that the strange lady, the aide-de-camp, and some of the servants, all
Pierre went in at the door, stepping on the soft carpet, and noticed

Come."
"The divine mercy is inexhaustible! Unction is about to be administered.

said:
in the discharge of duty, ran out and touching Pierre lightly on the arm
last Anna Mikhaylovna, still with the same expression, pale but resolute
Through that door was heard a noise of things being moved about, and at
the priests and deacons and some servants also went in at the door.
whole body jerked at each step. The eldest princess followed him, and
through the door on tiptoe. He could not walk well on tiptoe and his
illness. Prince Vasili said something to Lorrain in passing and went
perplexity, and only later grasped that a stroke was an attack of
suggested to him a blow from something. He looked at Prince Vasili in
Pierre's mind was in such a confused state that the word "stroke"

"He had another stroke about half an hour ago. Courage, my friend..."

yet ashamed to call him "father."
knowing whether it would be proper to call the dying man "the count,"
But Pierre thought it necessary to ask: "How is..." and hesitated, not

and he turned to go.
"Courage, courage, my friend! He has asked to see you. That is well!"

fixed on.
and drew it downwards as if wishing to ascertain whether it was firmly
Pierre. He went up to him, took his hand (a thing he never used to do),
his eyes seemed larger than usual when he glanced round and noticed
stars on his breast. He seemed to have grown thinner since the morning;
majestically entered the room. He was wearing his long coat with three
Not two minutes had passed before Prince Vasili with head erect

those who were guiding him.
own ideas tonight, but must yield himself up entirely to the will of
order not to lose his head and do foolish things he must not act on his
and decided in his own mind that all was as it should be, and that in
symmetrically on his knees in the naive attitude of an Egyptian statue,
camp, and sat down in the lady's chair, placing his huge hands
accept their services. He took the glove in silence from the aide-de-
which everyone expected of him, and that he was therefore bound to
that tonight he was a person obliged to perform some sort of awful rite
even in his way; but all at once he felt that this would not do, and
pick up the glove himself and to pass round the doctors who were not
wished to take another seat so as not to trouble the lady, and also to
silent as he passed by, and moved to make way for him. At first Pierre
and returned a glove Pierre had dropped; the doctors became respectfully
the priests, rose and offered him her seat; an aide-de-camp picked up
received was shown him. A strange lady, the one who had been talking to
of awe and even servility. A deference such as he had never before
whispered to one another, casting significant looks at him with a kind
with something more than curiosity and sympathy. He noticed that they
disappeared he noticed that the eyes of all in the room turned to him
toward the sofa she had indicated. As soon as Anna Mikhaylovna had
Pierre, having made up his mind to obey his monitress implicitly, moved

watching and it creaked very slightly as she disappeared behind it.
wait for her, she went silently toward the door that everyone was
"Trust in His mercy!" and pointing out a small sofa for him to sit and

tenderly sad voice, she said:
from the doctor to Pierre. To him, in a particularly respectful and
shoulders and eyes, almost closing the latter, sighed, and moved away
shoulders. Anna Mikhaylovna with just the same movement raised her
The doctor cast a rapid glance upwards and silently shrugged his

any hope?"
"Dear doctor," said she, "this young man is the count's son. Is there

Having said this she went up to the doctor.

count's son," she added more softly. "What a terrible moment!"
"all we relatives have been in such anxiety. This young man is the
"God be thanked that you are in time," said she to one of the priests;

first of one and then of another priest.
seeming to grow suddenly smaller, and respectfully received the blessing
there, she glided up to him with a sort of amble, not exactly bowing yet
glance at all those in the room and noticing the count's confessor
dying man wished to see, her own admission was assured. Casting a rapid
that afternoon. She felt that as she brought with her the person the
keeping Pierre close beside her, entered the room even more boldly than
moment had arrived. With the air of a practical Petersburg lady she now,
Anna Mikhaylovna's face expressed a consciousness that the decisive

meekly followed her.
entered, and at the big stout figure of Pierre who, hanging his head,
silent and turned to look at the pale tear-worn Anna Mikhaylovna as she
the same positions as before, whispering to one another. All became
Catherine the Great. The same people were still sitting here in almost
into the conservatory, with its large bust and full length portrait of
the reception room familiar to Pierre, with two Italian windows opening
servant who passed out on tiptoe without heeding them. They went into
spilled on the carpet. They were met by a deacon with a censer and by a
even in this room there now stood an empty bath, and water had been
but cold apartments known to Pierre only from the front approach, but
room adjoining the count's reception room. It was one of those sumptuous
things had to be. From the passage they went into a large, dimly lit
"watching over his interests" meant, but he decided that all these
Pierre could not make out what it was all about, and still less what

reply to his look, and went still faster along the passage.
"Be a man, my friend. I will look after your interests," said she in

if to say that this was no more than she had expected.
Mikhaylovna evinced no surprise, she only smiled faintly and sighed, as
stopped and glanced inquiringly over his spectacles at his guide. Anna
Prince Vasili's face so out of keeping with his dignity that Pierre
This action was so unlike her usual composure and the fear depicted on

her might.
jumped up and with a gesture of desperation slammed the door with all
Prince Vasili drew back with obvious impatience, while the princess
eldest princess were sitting close together talking. Seeing them pass,
passing instinctively glanced into the room, where Prince Vasili and the
was done in haste at that time), and Pierre and Anna Mikhaylovna in
decanter in her haste had not closed the door (everything in the house
door on the left led into the princesses' apartments. The maid with the
princess' health and then led Pierre along a stone passage. The first
with a decanter on a tray as "my dear" and "my sweet," asked about the
these rooms. Anna Mikhaylovna, addressing a maid who was hurrying past
in this part of the house and did not even know of the existence of
princesses, sat in a corner knitting a stocking. Pierre had never been
This door led into a back anteroom. An old man, a servant of the

already opening a door.
to be grew stronger, and he meekly followed Anna Mikhaylovna who was
Pierre did not understand a word, but the conviction that all this had

me, Pierre. I shall not forget your interests."
sighed. "I have loved you like a son from the first. Trust yourself to
Think that he is your father... perhaps in the agony of death." She
"Ah, my dear friend! Forget the wrongs that may have been done you.

over his spectacles.
"But really, hadn't I better go away?" he asked, looking kindly at her

you do, but be a man!"
when speaking to him that afternoon, "believe me I suffer no less than
"Ah, my friend!" she said, touching his arm as she had done her son's

Anna Mikhaylovna paused and waited for him to come up.

landing. "I'd better go to my own room."
"Perhaps the count did not ask for me," said Pierre when he reached the

permissible; "the door to the left, ma'am."
"Yes," replied a footman in a bold loud voice, as if anything were now

of one of them.
"Is this the way to the princesses' apartments?" asked Anna Mikhaylovna

and did not evince the least surprise at seeing them there.
men pressed close to the wall to let Pierre and Anna Mikhaylovna pass
carrying pails, came running downstairs, their boots clattering. These
Halfway up the stairs they were almost knocked over by some men who,
and haste, Pierre concluded that it was all absolutely necessary.
by the back stairs, yet judging by Anna Mikhaylovna's air of assurance
necessary for him to go to the count at all, still less why he had to go
was lagging behind, to follow. Though he did not see why it was
ascended the narrow dimly lit stone staircase, calling to Pierre, who
right," Pierre concluded, and followed Anna Mikhaylovna. She hurriedly
seeing these people, took any notice of them. "It seems to be all
Anna Mikhaylovna nor the footman nor the coachman, who could not help
same kind hiding in the shadow of the house on both sides. But neither
the wall. Pausing for a moment, Pierre noticed several other men of the
tradespeople, ran hurriedly from the entrance and hid in the shadow of
getting down from the carriage steps two men, who looked like
had not come to the front entrance but to the back door. While he was
interview with his dying father which awaited him. He noticed that they
Mikhaylovna out of the carriage, and only then began to think of the
corner and woke him up. Rousing himself, Pierre followed Anna
words of comfort to her companion, realized that he was asleep in his
over the straw beneath the windows, Anna Mikhaylovna, having turned with
into the court of Count Bezukhov's house. As the wheels rolled softly
Anna Mikhaylovna (who found it necessary to accompany him) was driving
princess' room, a carriage containing Pierre (who had been sent for) and
While these conversations were going on in the reception room and the

CHAPTER XXII




here for? But I will give her a piece of my mind. The time will come!"
princess, now quite changed. "And what does she come worming herself in
great sin, it is hatred of that vile woman!" almost shrieked the
princess, ignoring his question. "Now I know! Yes; if I have a sin, a
"It's in the inlaid portfolio that he keeps under his pillow," said the

"We've got to it at last--why did you not tell me about it sooner?"

vile, infamous paper, but I thought the thing was invalid."
would not see us for a whole fortnight. I know it was then he wrote this
Sophie--I can't repeat them--that it made the count quite ill and he
the count such vile, disgraceful things about us, especially about
"Ah, don't talk to me! Last winter she wheedled herself in here and told

"Do not let us lose any time..."

woman!"
Mikhaylovna whom I would not take for a housemaid... the infamous, vile
"It's that protege of yours, that sweet Princess Drubetskaya, that Anna

"That's not the point, my dear."

princess.
"Now I see it all! I know who has been intriguing--I know!" cried the

only reason for being here. I came simply to help him and you."
my sole desire is conscientiously to carry out his wishes; that is my
no doubt, forgotten it and will wish to destroy it. You understand that
You must know. We will take it at once and show it to the count. He has,
hour.... Tell me all you know about the will, and above all where it is.
us talk sensibly while there is still time, be it a day or be it but an
wish you to have as good an opinion of me. Don't upset yourself, and let
"I know your heart," repeated the prince. "I value your friendship and

"No, I have a wicked heart."

"Now come, come! Be reasonable. I know your excellent heart."

to be cunning and cruel."
in this world there is neither honor nor justice. In this world one has
shall always remember that in this world one must expect no reward, that
never could appreciate it. No, mon cousin," she added with a sigh, "I
again have risen had not the prince still held her fast, "though he
"Who sacrificed everything for him," chimed in the princess, who would

him die feeling that he is rendering unhappy those who..."
last moments by not letting him commit this injustice, and not to let
forgotten. Our duty, my dear, is to rectify his mistake, to ease his
all done casually in a moment of anger, of illness, and was afterwards
"There is still time, my dear. You must remember, Catiche, that it was

She gave her companion an angry glance.
had the air of one who has suddenly lost faith in the whole human race.
The princess wished to rise, but the prince held her by the hand. She

been intriguing!"
sacrificed myself. But only the base, the vile succeed! I know who has
"Yes, I was a fool! I still believed in people, loved them, and

his cheeks twitching more than ever.
"Do you or do you not know where that will is?" insisted Prince Vasili,

blackest ingratitude--in this house..."
nothing but meanness, deceit, envy, intrigue, and ingratitude--the
"Yes, I knew it long ago but had forgotten. I knew that I could expect

But the princess did not listen to him.

Prince Vasili.
"Yes, but you are not the only one. There are your sisters..." replied

don't want anything, Prince."
sacrificed everything for his sake!" she cried. "It's splendid! Fine! I
"And this is gratitude--this is recognition for those who have

She pushed the little dog off her lap and smoothed her dress.

don't now."
"That would be a fine thing!" said she. "I never wanted anything and I

evidently did not expect.
she began to speak passed through such transitions as she herself
thin lips grew white, though her eyes did not change, and her voice when
At this a sudden change evidently took place in the princess' ideas; her

solicitor) "and he says the same."
expert. I have just been talking to Dmitri Onufrich" (the family
sisters are not heiresses! If you don't believe me, then believe an
favor are among the count's papers, then, my dear girl, you and your
tenth time that if the letter to the Emperor and the will in Pierre's
as with a kinswoman, a good, kind, true relation. And I tell you for the
"I came here not to wrangle with you, but to talk about your interests
"My dear Princess Catherine Semenovna," began Prince Vasili impatiently,

witty and stinging.
the expression women assume when they suppose they are saying something
mon cousin, seem to consider me a perfect fool," said the princess with
"I know the will was made, but I also know that it is invalid; and you,

* And all that follows therefrom.


dutiful et tout ce qui s'ensuit! * That's certain."
destroyed, then you will have nothing but the consolation of having been
inherit everything under the will? And if the will and letter are not
Pierre will not be Pierre but will become Count Bezukhov, and will then
Emperor begging him to recognize Pierre as legitimate, it follows that
how is it you don't see that if the count has written a letter to the
"Well, really, Catiche! Can't you understand! You are so intelligent,

* A bastard.


contention.
would effectively prove to Prince Vasili the invalidity of his
batard!" * she added, as if supposing that this translation of the word
all stupid; but I know this: an illegitimate son cannot inherit... un
changing the expression of her eyes. "I am a woman, and you think we are
"What next?" the princess interrupted, smiling sardonically and not

ought to know where they are, and must find them, because..."
been destroyed or not. And if they have somehow been overlooked, you
dear, whether the will and letter were written, and whether they have
legal heir to everything and you won't get anything. You must know, my
"But, my poor Catiche, it is as clear as daylight! He will then be the

might happen, only not that.
"And our share?" asked the princess smiling ironically, as if anything

be granted. Pierre will get everything as the legitimate son."
letter will be delivered to the Emperor, and the petition will certainly
the words all is over, "and the count's papers are opened, the will and
as all is over," and Prince Vasili sighed to intimate what he meant by
The only question is, has it been destroyed or not? If not, then as soon
letter was written, though it was not sent, and the Emperor knew of it.
"I can tell you more," continued Prince Vasili, seizing her hand, "that

subject under discussion than those they are talking with.
The princess smiled as people do who think they know more about the

services, his request would be granted?..."
legitimation? Do you understand that in consideration of the count's
has been written to the Emperor in which the count asks for Pierre's
and becoming more animated and talking more rapidly: "what if a letter
"But, my dear," said Prince Vasili suddenly, clutching the little table

cannot leave the estate to Pierre. Pierre is illegitimate."
"He has made wills enough!" quietly remarked the princess. "But he

property, not to us his direct heirs, but to Pierre."
that last winter the count made a will by which he left all his
he had pushed away. "But... in short, the fact is... you know yourself
his bald head and angrily pulling back toward him the little table that
"Yes, yes, of course," interrupted Prince Vasili impatiently, rubbing

noble soul peacefully to leave this..."
replied, "and it is that He would be merciful to him and would allow his
"There is one thing I constantly pray God to grant, mon cousin," she

simply looking at him.
out whether she was considering what he had just said or whether she was
Prince Vasili looked questioningly at the princess, but could not make

"definitely demanded that he should be called."
I have sent for Pierre? The count," pointing to his portrait,
I am getting on for sixty and must be prepared for anything. Do you know
to talk or think of such matters. It is no easier for me; but, my dear,
are the count's only direct heirs. I know, I know how hard it is for you
"You know, Catiche, that we--you three sisters, Mamontov, and my wife--
went on, testily pushing away a little table without looking at her.
"And then of course my family has also to be considered," Prince Vasili

dull expression.
The princess continued to look at him without moving, and with the same

all, like children of my own, as you know."
everything. One must think of the future, of all of you... I love you
an inner struggle; "at such a moment as this one must think of
continued Prince Vasili, returning to his theme, apparently not without
"Well, you see, my dear princess and cousin, Catherine Semenovna,"

not to be the first to break silence, if she had to wait till morning.
hands, looked attentively into Prince Vasili's eyes evidently resolved
The princess, holding her little dog on her lap with her thin bony

glanced round in alarm.
strange; at one moment they looked impudently sly and at the next
which was never to be seen on it in a drawing room. His eyes too seemed
on one side, now on the other, giving his face an unpleasant expression
Prince Vasili said no more and his cheeks began to twitch nervously, now

serious talk."
a post horse, but still I must have a talk with you, Catiche, a very
"And I?" he said; "do you think it is easier for me? I am as worn out as

understood it as an expression of weariness.
devotion, or of weariness and hope of resting before long. Prince Vasili
with a sigh. This might have been taken as an expression of sorrow and
prominent gray eyes. Then she shook her head and glanced up at the icons
legs, looked directly at Prince Vasili with no sign of emotion in her
The princess, who had a straight, rigid body, abnormally long for her

understood without naming.
It was plain that this "well?" referred to much that they both

downwards as was his habit.
"Well, my dear?" said Prince Vasili, taking her hand and bending it

"I wished to get a nap, mon cousin, but I can't."

prepared to listen.
stonily severe expression; and, sitting down opposite the prince, she
"I thought perhaps something had happened," she said with her unchanging

*Catherine.


remarked. "Well, sit down: let's have a talk."
she had just vacated. "You have made the place warm, I must say," he
Catiche," * muttered the prince, seating himself wearily on the chair
"No, there is no change. I only came to have a talk about business,

"Has anything happened?" she asked. "I am so terrified."

varnish.
that it seemed to be made of one piece with her head and covered with
She rose and smoothed her hair, which was as usual so extremely smooth

"Ah, is it you, cousin?"

just visible behind a screen. A small dog began to bark.
cupboards, and little tables. The quilt of a high, white feather bed was
The room was crowded with small pieces of furniture, whatnots,
the icons and there was a pleasant scent of flowers and burnt pastilles.
In this room it was almost dark; only two tiny lamps were burning before

Meanwhile Prince Vasili had opened the door into the princess' room.

and state the patient's condition.
decorous smile of self-satisfaction at being able clearly to understand
"Tonight, not later," said he in a low voice, and he moved away with a

his nose.
Lorrain, pursing up his lips, waved a severely negative finger before

Lorrain in French which he pronounced badly.
"Do you think he can last till morning?" asked the German, addressing

instructions. The German doctor went up to Lorrain.
princess went in with the drink she had prepared according to Lorrain's
Everyone again looked toward the door, which creaked as the second

"It von't go begging," replied the German with a smile.

who will inherit his wealth?" he added in a whisper.
"And what a well-preserved man he was!" remarked the aide-de-camp. "And

camp, "dat one liffs after de sird stroke."
"Dere has neffer been a gase," a German doctor was saying to an aide-de-

he indicated with his delicate fingers what he meant by a pinch.
"Take a glass of boiled water and put a pinch of cream of tartar," and

The doctor glanced at his watch.

"Yes."

"Has he taken his medicine?"

Lorrain considered.

something to drink?"
"Yes, indeed," replied the princess with a sigh. "So he may have

if one were in the country."
"The weather is beautiful, Princess; and besides, in Moscow one feels as
"Beautiful," said the doctor in answer to a remark about the weather.

table.
graceful pose under a portrait of Catherine, leaning his elbow on a
from weeping and sat down beside Dr. Lorrain, who was sitting in a
The second princess had just come from the sickroom with her eyes red

"I knew someone who received that sacrament seven times."

anyone. They wished to administer the sacrament of unction."
"Yes, and he is over sixty. I hear the count no longer recognizes

other side of the room. "How young-looking he is!"
"Who was that? The Military Governor himself?" was being asked at the

head.
hand over the thin grizzled strands of hair combed back across his bald
"Ah, madam, it is a great sacrament," replied the priest, passing his

on the subject.
adding the priest's clerical title, as if she had no opinion of her own
"I wonder, is it not too late to administer unction?" asked the lady,

listening naively to his words.
an old priest to a lady who had taken a seat beside him and was
"The limits of human life... are fixed and may not be o'erpassed," said

his door, which creaked slightly when opened.
room, grew silent and gazed with eyes full of curiosity or expectancy at
whispers, and, whenever anyone went into or came from the dying man's
Those who were in the dimly lit reception room spoke in nervous

back of the house, to the room of the eldest princess.
went with unusually hurried steps down the long corridor leading to the
so for a while he rose, and, looking about him with frightened eyes,
his elbow on his knee and covering his face with his hand. After sitting
a chair in the ballroom, crossing one leg high over the other, leaning
When the Military Governor had gone, Prince Vasili sat down all alone on

low tones.
escorted him to the door, repeating something to him several times in
Vasili, who had grown thinner and paler during the last few days,
on him by the doctors, clergy, and relatives of the family. Prince
bows and trying to escape as quickly as possible from the glances fixed
hour alone with the dying man, passed out, slightly acknowledging their
respectfully when the Military Governor, having stayed about half an
The magnificent reception room was crowded. Everyone stood up

Bezukhov.
last farewell to the celebrated grandee of Catherine's court, Count
inquire after the count's health, came himself that evening to bid a
Governor of Moscow, who had been assiduous in sending aides-de-camp to
expectation of an important order for an expensive funeral. The Military
a group of undertakers, who hid whenever a carriage drove up, waited in
of suspense usual at such moments. Outside the house, beyond the gates,
sacrament of unction, and in his house there was the bustle and thrill
communion was administered to the dying man, preparations made for the
doctors pronounced recovery impossible. After a mute confession,
cooks were getting the supper, Count Bezukhov had a sixth stroke. The
tune in which the weary musicians blundered, and while tired footmen and
While in the Rostovs' ballroom the sixth anglaise was being danced, to a

CHAPTER XXI




sleeves and puffing heavily.
"That was a Daniel Cooper!" exclaimed Marya Dmitrievna, tucking up her

"That's how we used to dance in our time, ma chere," said the count.

faces with their cambric handkerchiefs.
Natasha. Both partners stood still, breathing heavily and wiping their
sweep with his arm, amid a thunder of applause and laughter led by
foot backwards, bowing his perspiring head, smiling and making a wide
partner round to her seat, he executed the final pas, raising his soft
Dmitrievna, now on his toes, now on his heels; until, turning his
lightly, and yet more lightly whirled the count, flying round Marya
the musicians to play faster. Faster, faster, and faster; lightly, more
intervals of the dance the count, breathing deeply, waved and shouted to
though as it was they never took their eyes off the couple. In the
kept pulling everyone by sleeve or dress, urging them to "look at Papa!"
try to do so. All were watching the count and Marya Dmitrievna. Natasha
attract a moment's attention to their own evolutions and did not even
The dance grew livelier and livelier. The other couples could not
which everyone appreciated in view of her size and habitual severity.
move her shoulders or bend her arms when turning, or stamp her foot--
produced no less impression by slight exertions--the least effort to
agility with which he capered about on his light feet, Marya Dmitrievna
the spectators by the unexpectedness of his adroit maneuvers and the
But if the count, getting more and more into the swing of it, charmed
expression only in her more and more beaming face and quivering nose.
by the whole of the count's plump figure, in Marya Dmitrievna found
stern but handsome face really joined in the dance. What was expressed
hanging down (she had handed her reticule to the countess), and only her
want to dance well. Her enormous figure stood erect, her powerful arms
The count danced well and knew it. But his partner could not and did not

nurse, as she stood in one of the doorways.
"Just look at the master! A regular eagle he is!" loudly remarked the

other--who with beaming faces had come to see their master making merry.
filled by the domestic serfs--the men on one side and the women on the
dance) began to sound, all the doorways of the ballroom were suddenly
strains of Daniel Cooper (somewhat resembling those of a merry peasant
onlookers for what was to follow. As soon as the provocatively gay
smile that broadened his round face more and more, prepared the
shoulders, turned out his toes, tapped gently with his foot, and, by a
Marya Dmitrievna, curved his arms, beat time, straightened his
jovial old gentleman, who standing beside his tall and stout partner,
And indeed everybody in the room looked with a smile of pleasure at the

curly head to her knees and made the whole room ring with her laughter.
forgetting that she was dancing with a grown-up partner she bent her
"Look at Papa!" shouted Natasha to the whole company, and quite

(Strictly speaking, Daniel Cooper was one figure of the anglaise.)
This was the count's favorite dance, which he had danced in his youth.

"Semen! Do you know the Daniel Cooper?"

addressing the first violin:
he clapped his hands to the musicians and shouted up to their gallery,
up his face and as soon as the last figure of the ecossaise was ended,
Marya Dmitrievna. He drew himself up, a smile of debonair gallantry lit
with playful ceremony somewhat in ballet style, offered his bent arm to
Marya Dmitrievna and the count, both with merry countenances. The count,
replacing their purses and pocketbooks, entered the ballroom. First came
visitors. They now, stretching themselves after sitting so long, and
been playing cards with the majority of the more distinguished and older
pushed back in the sitting room where the count and Marya Dmitrievna had
In the midst of the third ecossaise there was a clatter of chairs being

"Well, really, Mamma! Why should you? What is there to be surprised at?"

Natasha blushed and laughed.

the ballroom, pointing to Natasha.
"Dear, dear! Just look at her!" exclaimed the countess as she crossed

smiling over the fan.
she had learned it) she talked with her partner, fanning herself and
Assuming quite the pose of a society woman (heaven knows when and where
She had a fan in her hand that one of the ladies had given her to hold.
sitting in a conspicuous place and talking to him like a grown-up lady.
she was dancing with a grown-up man, who had been abroad. She was
Pierre sat down with his little partner. Natasha was perfectly happy;
While the couples were arranging themselves and the musicians tuning up,

little girl.
my teacher..." And lowering his big arm he offered it to the slender
"I am afraid of mixing the figures," Pierre replied; "but if you will be

"Mamma told me to ask you to join the dancers."

blushing:
Natasha came in and walking straight up to Pierre said, laughing and
which several others joined but which bored Pierre. When the music began
as a man recently returned from abroad, in a political conversation in
Pierre was sitting in the drawing-room where Shinshin had engaged him,

coughing of the musicians were heard from the gallery.
ready to dance in the large hall, and the sound of the feet and the
He had not finished the last verse before the young people began to get

A day or two, then bliss unspoilt, But oh! till then I cannot live!...

It is for thee thus swells her heart, Sighing its message out to thee...
That while her fingers touch the harp Wafting sweet music o'er the lea,

thee!
To feel that in this world there's one Who still is thinking but of
At nighttime in the moon's fair glow How sweet, as fancies wander free,


Nicholas sang a song he had just learned:
the quartette, "The Brook," with which everyone was delighted. Then
and light, joyous steps. At the visitors' request the young people sang
after Natasha down the passage into the sitting room with flushed face
verses in the bosom of her dress close to her bony little chest, ran
Sonya, shaking off some down which clung to her and tucking away the

And she set off at a run along the passage.

Natasha, stopping suddenly. "I feel so happy!"
"Do you know, that fat Pierre who sat opposite me is so funny!" said

"Come along!"

"Well, let's go and sing 'The Brook.'"

Both laughed.

strayed from under her friend's plaits.
"Really, truly!" answered Natasha, pushing in a crisp lock that had

frock and hair.
"Do you think so?... Really? Truly?" she said, quickly smoothing her

playing with the ball of worsted as a kitten should.
seemed ready to lift its tail, jump down on its soft paws, and begin
Sonya sat up. The little kitten brightened, its eyes shone, and it

Natasha kissed her on the hair.

Nicholas will tell her himself, and he doesn't care at all for Julie."
mind her! And all will come right and she won't say anything to Mamma.
darling Sonya!" and she kissed her and laughed. "Vera's spiteful; never
clever and so good!" said Natasha. "Don't you cry, Sonya, dear love,
quite possible. You know I have told him all about it. And he is so
cousin. And we are only second cousins, you know. And Boris says it is
it all was? There's Uncle Shinshin's brother has married his first
how, but don't you remember that it could all be arranged and how nice
supper? Why, we settled how everything was to be. I don't quite remember
how we and Nicholas, all three of us, talked in the sitting room after
"Sonya, don't believe her, darling! Don't believe her! Do you remember

her.
her up, hugged her, and, smiling through her tears, began comforting
And again she began to sob, more bitterly than before. Natasha lifted

Natasha, what have I done to deserve it?..."
that he'll marry Julie. You see how he's been with her all day...
was ungrateful, and that Mamma would never allow him to marry me, but
she found them on my table and said she'd show them to Mamma, and that I
"Yes, these verses Nicholas wrote himself and I copied some others, and

dinner? Hasn't she?"
of her friend's sorrow, "I'm sure Vera has said something to you since
"Sonya," she suddenly exclaimed, as if she had guessed the true reason

understood all the gravity of her friend's trouble.
feather bed. Natasha began consoling her, but her face showed that she
Sonya could not continue, and again hid her face in her hands and in the

that I would willingly sacrifice everything, only I have nothing...."
Vera... And what for? What have I done to her? I am so grateful to you
made the sign of the cross, "I love her so much, and all of you, only
heartless and ungrateful, while truly... God is my witness," and she
mother and called her so) "that I am spoiling Nicholas' career and am
And besides, if she tells Mamma" (Sonya looked upon the countess as her
have to... the Metropolitan himself... and even then it can't be done.
no difficulties in your way.... But Nicholas is my cousin... one would
also," she went on, gaining a little strength; "he is nice... there are
"It's all very well for you... I am not envious... I love you and Boris

And she began to cry again because he had such a noble soul.

a soul he has!"
"still, I should not cry, but you can't... no one can understand... what
paper she held in her hand--with the verses Nicholas had written,
he told me himself... but still I should not cry," and she showed a
"Nicholas is going away in a week's time, his... papers... have come...

began wiping her eyes and explaining.
feather bed and hugging her friend. With an effort Sonya sat up and
still deeper in the bed. Natasha wept, sitting on the blue-striped
Sonya tried to lift her head to answer but could not, and hid her face
to wail like a baby without knowing why, except that Sonya was crying.
Natasha's large mouth widened, making her look quite ugly, and she began
"Sonya! What is it? What is the matter?... Oo... Oo... Oo...!" And

her mouth drooped.
fixed, and then a shiver passed down her broad neck and the corners of
radiantly happy all that saint's day, suddenly changed: her eyes became
that her bare little shoulders shook. Natasha's face, which had been so
hiding her face with her slender fingers, and sobbing so convulsively
bed on the top of the chest, crumpling her gauzy pink dress under her,
And there in fact was Sonya lying face downward on Nurse's dirty feather
of mourning for the younger female generation in the Rostov household.
be on the chest in the passage. The chest in the passage was the place
nursery, but Sonya was not there either. Natasha concluded that she must
Running into Sonya's room and not finding her there, Natasha ran to the

look for her.
She looked round and seeing that her friend was not in the room ran to

is Sonya?"
"Well, then, let's be quick. Boris, come here," said Natasha. "But where

"'The Brook,'" suggested Nicholas.

"What shall we sing?" she said.

same time felt shy.
though she were grown up, was evidently very proud of this but at the
their musical talent, to sing something. Natasha, who was treated as
other young ladies in begging Natasha and Nicholas, who were noted for
had played a little air with variations on the harp, she joined the
clavichord and harp. Julie by general request played first. After she
young people, at the countess' instigation, gathered round the
dropping into his usual after-dinner nap, and laughed at everything. The
The count, holding his cards fanwise, kept himself with difficulty from

sitting room, some in the library.
visitors settled themselves, some in the two drawing rooms, some in the
The card tables were drawn out, sets made up for boston, and the count's

CHAPTER XX




returned to the drawing room and to the count's study.
same order in which they had entered but with redder faces, the guests
one another. Again the footmen rushed about, chairs scraped, and in the
the table to clink glasses with the count, with the children, and with
their seats, went up to "congratulate" the countess, and reached across
again struck up, the count and countess kissed, and the guests, leaving
pineapple ice. Before the ices, champagne was served round. The band
Natasha only desisted when she had been told that there would be

treat Marya Dmitrievna in this fashion.
incredible boldness and smartness of this little girl who had dared to
joined in. Everyone laughed, not at Marya Dmitrievna's answer but at the
Marya Dmitrievna and the countess burst out laughing, and all the guests

want to know!"
"No! What kind, Marya Dmitrievna? What kind?" she almost screamed; "I

"Carrot ices."

"Marya Dmitrievna! What kind of ice pudding? I don't like ice cream."

Marya Dmitrievna.
Natasha saw there was nothing to be afraid of and so she braved even

"Ice pudding, but you won't get any," said Marya Dmitrievna.

Pierre, glancing at him again.
"You see! I have asked," whispered Natasha to her little brother and to

Sonya and fat little Petya doubled up with laughter.

with saucy gaiety, confident that her prank would be taken in good part.
"Mamma! What sweets are we going to have?" Natasha again cried boldly,

"You had better take care!" said the countess.

elders.
Most of the guests, uncertain how to regard this sally, looked at the

"Cossack!" she said threateningly.

fat finger.
The countess tried to frown, but could not. Marya Dmitrievna shook her

still more firm and resolute.
"Mamma! What sweets are we going to have?" and Natasha's voice sounded

The conversation was hushed.

threatening and forbidding movement of her head.
face that it was only mischief, she shook a finger at her sternly with a
"What is it?" asked the countess, startled; but seeing by her daughter's

audible the whole length of the table.
"Mamma!" rang out the clear contralto notes of her childish voice,

was coming, and turning to her mother:
rose, by a glance inviting Pierre, who sat opposite, to listen to what
Her face suddenly flushed with reckless and joyous resolution. She half

"I will," replied Natasha.

ask!"
"You won't ask," Natasha's little brother was saying; "I know you won't

the men's at the other.
Once more the conversations concentrated, the ladies' at the one end and

"That's true!"

length of the table.
replied Marya Dmitrievna's deep voice, which easily carried the whole
hands. You may die in your bed or God may spare you in a battle,"
"I have four sons in the army but still I don't fret. It is all in God's

son's going, Marya Dmitrievna? My son is going."
"It's all about the war," the count shouted down the table. "You know my

"I am speaking ze truce," replied the hussar with a smile.

you exciting yourself? Do you think the French are here?"
you thumping the table for?" she demanded of the hussar, "and why are
deep voice suddenly inquired from the other end of the table. "What are
"What are you making such a noise about over there?" Marya Dmitrievna's

table.
"The young man's a real hussar!" shouted the colonel, again thumping the

"That's fine," said he.

Pierre listened to the colonel's speech and nodded approvingly.

to her neck and shoulders while Nicholas was speaking.
Sonya trembled all over and blushed to her ears and behind them and down

"What you said just now was splendid!" said his partner Julie.

awkward.
were too enthusiastic and emphatic for the occasion and were therefore
conscious--as were others--after the words were uttered that his remarks
"I am convinced that we Russians must die or conquer," he concluded,
desperation as though he were at that moment facing some great danger.
plate round and moving his wineglasses about with as much decision and
"I am quite of your opinion," replied Nicholas, flaming up, turning his

intent on the colonel.
war was being discussed had turned from his partner with eyes and ears
judge of it?" he added, addressing Nicholas, who when he heard that the
an end of it! And how do you, a young man and a young hussar, how do you
turning to the count. "Zat is how ve old hussars look at it, and zere's
particularly on the word possible... "as po-o-ossible," he ended, again
pe vell. And ve must discuss it as little as po-o-ossible"... he dwelt
thumping the table; "and ve must tie for our Emperor, and zen all vill
"Ve must vight to the last tr-r-op of our plood!" said the colonel,

*(4) I just ask you that.

*(3) Hollow.

*(2) That suits us down to the ground.

*Do you know the proverb?


from French to Russian.
Suvorovs now? Je vous demande un peu,"*(4) said he, continually changing
about; yet they beat him a plate couture,*(3) and where are we to find
"Cela nous convient a merveille.*(2) Suvorov now--he knew what he was
spindles at home!'?" said Shinshin, puckering his brows and smiling.
"Connaissez-vous le Proverbe: * 'Jerome, Jerome, do not roam, but turn

with dignity and looking to the count for approval.
"Zat, my dear sir, is vy..." he concluded, drinking a tumbler of wine

the attainment of that purpose.
to despatch part of the army abroad and to create a new condition for
-to establish peace in Europe on firm foundations--has now decided him
... and the wish, which constitutes the Emperor's sole and absolute aim-

repeated from the opening words of the manifesto:
Then with the unerring official memory that characterized him he

if in it lay the gist of the matter.
of its alliances..." he spoke this last word with particular emphasis as
Russia and zat ze safety and dignity of ze Empire as vell as ze sanctity
manifessto zat he cannot fiew wiz indifference ze danger vreatening
accent, "for the reasson zat ze Emperor knows zat. He declares in ze
"It is for the reasson, my goot sir," said he, speaking with a German

the service and patriotically Russian. He resented Shinshin's remark.
The colonel was a stout, tall, plethoric German, evidently devoted to

"He has stopped Austria's cackle and I fear it will be our turn next."
"And why the deuce are we going to fight Bonaparte?" remarked Shinshin.

forwarded by courier to the commander-in-chief.
Petersburg and that a copy, which he had himself seen, had that day been
colonel told them that the declaration of war had already appeared in
At the men's end of the table the talk grew more and more animated. The

CHAPTER XIX




knowledge.
greediness that he wanted it, but simply from a conscientious desire for
no one would understand that it was not to quench his thirst or from
appear as if he did not want any of that wine, but was mortified because
with a bottle wrapped in a napkin passed him by. He frowned, trying to
to his people in Germany; and he felt greatly offended when the butler
and kinds of dessert, in order to send a full description of the dinner
children. The German tutor was trying to remember all the dishes, wines,
uneasily as if preparing to resent any slight that might be put upon the
Julie were saying to one another. The governess kept looking round
pale, now blushed and strained every nerve to overhear what Nicholas and
company smile but was evidently tormented by jealousy; now she turned
he was again talking with the same involuntary smile. Sonya wore a
Nicholas sat at some distance from Sonya, beside Julie Karagina, to whom

inclined to laugh without knowing why.
look fell on Pierre, and that funny lively little girl's look made him
love with and have just kissed for the first time. Sometimes that same
was looking at Boris as girls of thirteen look at the boy they are in
increasing amiability at the other guests. Natasha, who sat opposite,
held out one at random and drank with enjoyment, gazing with ever-
engraved with the count's monogram that stood before his plate, Pierre
or "Rhine wine" as the case might be. Of the four crystal glasses
the next man's shoulders and whispered: "Dry Madeira"... "Hungarian"...
the butler thrust mysteriously forward, wrapped in a napkin, from behind
game without omitting a single dish or one of the wines. These latter
the two soups he chose turtle with savory patties and went on to the
Pierre spoke little but examined the new faces, and ate a great deal. Of
were and exchanging glances with Natasha, who was sitting opposite.
heavenly feeling. Boris was telling his new friend Pierre who the guests
with tender smiles was saying to Vera that love is not an earthly but a
much that the count held him up as a pattern to the other guests. Berg
colonel of hussars who, growing more and more flushed, ate and drank so
men's end the voices sounded louder and louder, especially that of the
ladies' end an even chatter of voices was heard all the time, at the
their redness to contrast more than usual with his gray hair. At the
behind the pineapples at her husband whose face and bald head seemed by
without omitting her duties as hostess, threw significant glances from
neighbors' glasses, not neglecting his own. The countess in turn,
and her tall cap with its light-blue ribbons, and busily filled his
crystal decanters and fruit vases, the count kept glancing at his wife
the other side, the children, tutors, and governesses. From behind the
grownup young people: Vera beside Berg, and Pierre beside Boris; and on
visitors on his right. Midway down the long table on one side sat the
with the hussar colonel on his left and Shinshin and the other male
other lady visitors were farther down. At the other end sat the count,
Marya Dmitrievna on her right and Anna Mikhaylovna on her left, the
steps of the footmen. At one end of the table sat the countess with
the clatter of knives and forks, the voices of visitors, and the soft
places. Then the strains of the count's household band were replaced by
band struck up in the gallery, and the guests settled down in their
followed singly. The footmen began moving about, chairs scraped, the
whole dining hall, and last of all the children, tutors, and governesses
went in with Nicholas. After them other couples followed, filling the
with Shinshin. Berg gave his arm to Vera. The smiling Julie Karagina
Nicholas was to go with him to the regiment; then came Anna Mikhaylovna
the arm of a colonel of hussars, a man of importance to them because
The count went in first with Marya Dmitrievna, the countess followed on

"Well, I suppose it is time we were at table?" said Marya Dmitrievna.

from laughing.
She turned away and gave her hand to the count, who could hardly keep

for shame! It would be better if you went to the war."
he amuses himself setting a policeman astride a bear! For shame, sir,
"A fine lad! My word! A fine lad!... His father lies on his deathbed and

follow, for this was clearly only a prelude.
evident duty." She paused. All were silent, expectant of what was to
your father the truth when he was in favor, and in your case it's my
"Come nearer, come nearer, friend! I used to be the only one to tell

way through his spectacles.
sleeves still higher. Pierre approached, looking at her in a childlike
of voice. "Come here, my friend..." and she ominously tucked up her
"Eh, eh, friend! Come here a bit," said she, assuming a soft high tone

Pierre.
her saint's-day fete, turned away at once and addressed herself to
having given them to the rosy Natasha, who beamed with the pleasure of
She took a pair of pear-shaped ruby earrings from her huge reticule and,

I like her."
fearless and gay to kiss her hand. "I know she's a scamp of a girl, but
Natasha a Cossack) and she stroked the child's arm as she came up
"Well," said she, "how's my Cossack?" (Marya Dmitrievna always called

look for husbands for them whether you like it or not...."
these nestlings are growing up," and she pointed to the girls. "You must
to hunt with your dogs? But what is to be done, old man? Just see how
was kissing her hand, "you're feeling dull in Moscow, I daresay? Nowhere
others. "Well, you old sinner," she went on, turning to the count who
children," she said, in her loud, full-toned voice which drowned all
"Health and happiness to her whose name day we are keeping and to her

rolling them up. Marya Dmitrievna always spoke in Russian.
surveying the guests, and leisurely arranged her wide sleeves as if
holding high her fifty-year-old head with its gray curls, she stood
oldest rose. Marya Dmitrievna paused at the door. Tall and stout,
All the unmarried ladies and even the married ones except the very

entered the room.
"Herself," came the answer in a rough voice, and Marya Dmitrievna

"Marya Dmitrievna?" came her voice from there.

sides. The countess rose and went into the ballroom.
charming... You are very kind... Countess Apraksina..." was heard on all
guests were all conversing with one another. "The Razumovskis... It was
answered her, as he had the countess, only in monosyllables. The other
sitting down beside him she began to speak about his father; but he
understood that she was being asked to entertain this young man, and
The countess exchanged glances with Anna Mikhaylovna. The latter

"Very interesting."

interesting."
"You have been in Paris recently, I believe? I suppose it's very

"Non, madame." He smiled quite inappropriately.

"You have not yet seen my husband?"

"Oui, madame," replied he, looking around him.

"You have only lately arrived?" the countess asked him.

could have played such a prank on a policeman.
this big, stout, quiet man, wondering how such a clumsy, modest fellow
guests, knowing of the affair with the bear, looked with curiosity at
the way and was the only one who did not notice the fact. Most of the
of somebody and answered all her questions in monosyllables. He was in
he went on naively looking around through his spectacles as if in search
blocking the way for everyone. The countess tried to make him talk, but
middle of the drawing room on the first chair he had come across,
Pierre had come just at dinnertime and was sitting awkwardly in the

* Hors d'oeuvres.


that is not yet ready.
waiting for--some important relation who has not yet arrived, or a dish
and the visitors try to guess from these glances who, or what, they are
hostess look toward the door, and now and then glance at one another,
show that they are not at all impatient for their food. The host and
conversation but think it necessary to move about and talk, in order to
expecting the summons to zakuska, * avoid engaging in any long
It was just the moment before a big dinner when the assembled guests,

room.
Berg smiled joyously. The count, by his guests, went into the drawing

feet off the sofa.
I'll warrant," said Shinshin, patting him on the shoulder and taking his
"Well, my boy, you'll get along wherever you go--foot or horse--that

disarmed his hearers.
sedate, and the naivete of his youthful egotism was so obvious, that he
too, might have their own interests. But all he said was so prettily
enjoyed narrating all this, and did not seem to suspect that others,
the regiment, and how satisfied his father was with him. Berg evidently
might easily succeed to the post; how popular he was with everyone in
company commander might get killed and he, as senior in the company,
gained a step on his old comrades of the Cadet Corps; how in wartime the
continued to explain how by exchanging into the Guards he had already
talking came up to listen. Berg, oblivious of irony or indifference,
The count burst out laughing. The other guests seeing that Shinshin was

* So that squares matters.


his mouth and winking at the count.
proverb says," remarked Shinshin, moving his pipe to the other side of
"La balance y est... * A German knows how to skin a flint, as the

ring.
aside and to send something to my father," he went on, emitting a smoke
done with two hundred and thirty rubles! I even manage to put a little
much more frequently in the Foot Guards. Then just think what can be
be in a more prominent position," continued Berg, "and vacancies occur
"Besides that, Peter Nikolaevich, by exchanging into the Guards I shall

desire of everyone else.
if it were obvious to him that his success must always be the chief
he, looking at Shinshin and the count with a joyful, pleasant smile, as
rank of lieutenant; but as it is I receive two hundred and thirty," said
get not more than two hundred rubles every four months, even with the
"Consider my position, Peter Nikolaevich. Were I in the cavalry I should

circumstantially and with evident satisfaction.
as the conversation concerned himself he would begin to talk
out of countenance himself or making others uncomfortable, but as soon
on himself. He could remain silent for hours without being at all put
and silent when the talk related to any topic that had no direct bearing
conversation always related entirely to himself; he would remain calm
Berg always spoke quietly, politely, and with great precision. His

position now, Peter Nikolaevich..."
advantages are far less than in the infantry. Just consider my own
"No, Peter Nikolaevich; I only want to show that in the cavalry the

* You expect to make an income out of the government.


to make something out of your company?"
his speech. "Vous comptez vous faire des rentes sur l'etat; * you want
expressions with the choicest French phrases--which was a peculiarity of
Shinshin, laughing ironically and mixing the most ordinary Russian
"Well, then, old chap, mon tres honorable Alphonse Karlovich," said

two loquacious talkers at one another.
fond of, was that of listener, especially when he succeeded in setting
favorite occupation when not playing boston, a card game he was very
"intended." The count sat between them and listened attentively. His
Natasha had teased her elder sister Vera, speaking of Berg as her
regiment with whom Boris was to travel to join the army, and about whom
mouth in rings. This was Lieutenant Berg, an officer in the Semenov
red lips gently inhaled the smoke, letting it escape from his handsome
brushed, and buttoned, held his pipe in the middle of his mouth and with
The latter, a fresh, rosy officer of the Guards, irreproachably washed,
said in Moscow society. He seemed to be condescending to his companion.
Shinshin, a cousin of the countess', a man with "a sharp tongue" as they
smoke spasmodically and screwing up his eyes. This was an old bachelor,
having stuck an amber mouthpiece far into his mouth, was inhaling the
young man. He sat with his legs up on the sofa as if quite at home and,
face, already growing old, though he was dressed like a most fashionable
One of them was a sallow, clean-shaven civilian with a thin and wrinkled

against each other.
listened to the conversation of his two neighbors, whom he egged on
side and then to the other watched the smokers with evident pleasure and
talking. He neither smoked nor talked, but bending his head first to one
The count sat on the sofa between two guests who were smoking and
of them had yet seen the manifesto, but they all knew it had appeared.
that had been announced in a manifesto, and about the recruiting. None
In the count's room, which was full of tobacco smoke, they talked of war

and feared her.
stories about her, while none the less all without exception respected
wondered at her, laughed privately at her rudenesses, and told good
Imperial family as well as to all Moscow and Petersburg, and both cities
sense and frank plainness of speech. Marya Dmitrievna was known to the
dragon, a lady distinguished not for wealth or rank, but for common
expecting Marya Dmitrievna Akhrosimova, known in society as le terrible
time to time he went out to ask: "Hasn't she come yet?" They were
his study and showed them his choice collection of Turkish pipes. From
already seated in the drawing room. The count took the gentlemen into
Countess Rostova, with her daughters and a large number of guests, was

CHAPTER XVIII




But those tears were pleasant to them both.
about such a base thing as money, and because their youth was over....
kindhearted, and because they--friends from childhood--had to think
wept too. They wept because they were friends, and because they were
Anna Mikhaylovna was already embracing her and weeping. The countess

"This is for Boris from me, for his outfit."

to embrace the countess at the appropriate moment.
Anna Mikhaylovna instantly guessed her intention and stooped to be ready

she took the money from under the handkerchief.
blush that looked very strange on her thin, dignified, elderly face, and
"Annette, for heaven's sake don't refuse me," the countess began, with a

ill! I was only there a few moments and hardly said a word..."
"Oh, what a terrible state he is in! One would not know him, he is so

"Well, my dear?" asked the countess.

her.
little table, and Anna Mikhaylovna noticed that something was agitating
clean notes, was lying ready under a handkerchief on the countess'
When Anna Mikhaylovna returned from Count Bezukhov's the money, all in

and having kissed his wife's hand he went back to his study.
"You, my little countess, are a notorious spendthrift," said the count,

the countess. "But I am in great need of this sum."
"Ah, money, Count, money! How much sorrow it causes in the world," said

That's a thing I hate! Everything is possible."
young man had departed. "There is never any 'impossible' with him.
"What a treasure that Dmitri is," added the count with a smile when the

"Yes, yes; just so! Bring it. Give it to the countess."

approaching anger. "I was forgetting... Do you wish it brought at once?"
was beginning to breathe heavily and quickly which was always a sign of
inform you... But, don't be uneasy," he added, noticing that the count
"When would you like them, your excellency?" asked Dmitri. "Allow me to

"Yes, Dmitri, clean ones, please," said the countess, sighing deeply.

countess."
tattered and dirty notes as last time, but nice clean ones for the
bring me seven hundred rubles, yes! But mind, don't bring me such
young man who had entered. "Bring me..." he reflected a moment, "yes,
"This is what I want, my dear fellow," said the count to the deferential

house and now managed all his affairs, stepped softly into the room.
Dmitri, a man of good family who had been brought up in the count's

to obey the summons. "Send Dmitri to me!"
tone only used by persons who are certain that those they call will rush
"Yes, immediately, immediately! Hey, who's there?" he called out in a

her cambric handkerchief she began wiping her husband's waistcoat.
"I want a great deal, Count! I want five hundred rubles," and taking out

pocketbook.
"Oh, little countess!"... and the count began bustling to get out his

Her face became sad.

you see, Count, I want some money."
waistcoat. "It's the saute, most likely," she added with a smile. "Well,
"You see, my dear... What's that mess?" she said, pointing to his

"What are your commands, little countess?"

his gray hair.
He sat down by his wife, his elbows on his knees and his hands ruffling

spent. He is worth it!"
my dear! I tasted it. The thousand rubles I paid for Taras were not ill-
"Well, little countess? What a saute of game au madere we are to have,

usual.
The count came waddling in to see his wife with a rather guilty look as

"Ask the count to come to me."

"I am very sorry, ma'am," answered the maid.

exaggerated politeness.
found expression in calling her maid "my dear" and speaking to her with
and was therefore out of sorts, a state of mind which with her always
The countess was upset by her friend's sorrow and humiliating poverty,

find you another place."
kept her waiting some minutes. "Don't you wish to serve me? Then I'll
"What is the matter with you, my dear?" she said crossly to the maid who

applying her handkerchief to her eyes. At last she rang.
Vladimirovich Bezukhov, Countess Rostova sat for a long time all alone
After Anna Mikhaylovna had driven off with her son to visit Count Cyril

CHAPTER XVII




"Oh, Heaven! How ill he is!" exclaimed the mother.

"Well, that is hardly a sufficient reason, Mamma..."

"Ah, my dear! He is so rich, and we are so poor!"

"But why do you expect that he will leave us anything?"

"The will will show that, my dear; our fate also depends on it."

son.
"I don't understand, Mamma--what is his attitude to Pierre?" asked the

were in the carriage. "He hardly recognizes anybody."
"Oh, he is in a dreadful state," said the mother to her son when they

"Adieu, ma bonne," answered Prince Vasili turning away from her.

Prince! May God support you..."
off. Perhaps God will help me to find a way to prepare him!... Adieu,
like this. Every moment is precious. I can't think why his nieces put it
shall do my duty. I will come and spend the night. He must not be left
"It is dreadful, dreadful!" she was saying, "but cost me what it may I

and her face was tearful.
Prince Vasili saw the princess off. She held a handkerchief to her eyes

his mind that they would be friends.
life, he felt an unaccountable tenderness for this young man and made up
As often happens in early youth, especially to one who leads a lonely

intelligent, and resolute young man.
imaginary sword, but smiling at the remembrance of that pleasant,
the room for a long time, no longer piercing an imaginary foe with his
into Boris' eyes. After he had gone Pierre continued pacing up and down
and warmly pressing his hand looked affectionately over his spectacles
order to make Boris' better acquaintance, promised to come to dinner,
A footman came in to summon Boris--the princess was going. Pierre, in

Boulogne expedition.
same mind he began explaining the advantages and disadvantages of the
Pierre saw that Boris wished to change the subject, and being of the

Boris with a smile.
"And so you think Napoleon will manage to get an army across?" asked

sent for me.... I am sorry for him as a man, but what can one do?"
hand. "Do you know, I have not once been in to see the count. He has not
what of it! I hope we'll get better acquainted," and he pressed Boris'
a pause, "that you should have suspected me!" He began to laugh. "Well,
am very glad to have made your acquaintance. It's queer," he added after
done it myself, I should not have had the courage, but it's splendid. I
might think that I... I understand, quite understand. I could not have
We have not met for such a long time... not since we were children. You
What you have just said is good, very good. Of course you don't know me.
"No, but I say," said Pierre, calming down, "you are a wonderful fellow!

became quite pleasant again.
extricated himself from an awkward situation and placed another in it,
And Boris, having apparently relieved himself of an onerous duty and

dinner at the Rostovs'?"
rule to speak out... Well, what answer am I to take? Will you come to
ease by him, "but I hope I have not offended you. I always make it a
must excuse me," said he, putting Pierre at ease instead of being put at
"I am glad I have spoken out fully. Perhaps you did not like it? You

But Boris again interrupted him.

very well..."
"Well, this is strange! Do you suppose I... who could think?... I know

mingled shame and vexation.
and, blushing far more than Boris, began to speak with a feeling of
up from the sofa, seized Boris under the elbow in his quick, clumsy way,
For a long time Pierre could not understand, but when he did, he jumped

I nor my mother would ever ask or take anything from him."
father is rich, I don't regard myself as a relation of his, and neither
poor, but for my own part at any rate, for the very reason that your
mistaken if you reckon me or my mother among such people. We are very
"But I just wish to say, to avoid misunderstandings, that you are quite

"So it does," thought Pierre.

trying to get something out of the rich man?"
changing his tone or attitude, "it must seem to you that everyone is
"And it must seem to you," said Boris flushing slightly, but not

something disconcerting to himself.
Pierre was still afraid that this officer might inadvertently say

"Yes, it is all very horrid," interrupted Pierre, "very horrid."

perhaps outlive us all, as I sincerely hope he will..."
wondering to whom the count will leave his fortune, though he may
"Moscow has nothing else to do but gossip," Boris went on. "Everybody is

Pierre's eyes.
Boris spoke distinctly, clearly, and dryly, looking straight into
sake that the latter might say something he would afterwards regret. But
Pierre smiled in his good-natured way as if afraid for his companion's

father."
gossip," he continued. "Just now they are talking about you and your
about it and have not thought about it. Moscow is chiefly busy with
than with politics," said he in his quiet ironical tone. "I know nothing
"We here in Moscow are more occupied with dinner parties and scandal

papers and it was the first time he had heard Villeneuve's name.
Boris knew nothing about the Boulogne expedition; he did not read the

doesn't make a mess of things!"
Channel. I think the expedition is quite feasible. If only Villeneuve
English will come off badly, you know, if Napoleon gets across the
where we are. And what do you think of the Boulogne expedition? The
many relatives in Moscow! So you are Boris? Of course. Well, now we know
"Oh dear, what am I thinking about? I've mixed everything up. One has so

Pierre shook his head and arms as if attacked by mosquitoes or bees.

never knew any Madame Jacquot."
Drubetskaya. Rostov, the father, is Ilya, and his son is Nicholas. I
sarcastic smile. "I am Boris, son of Princess Anna Mikhaylovna
"You are mistaken," said Boris deliberately, with a bold and slightly

went to the Sparrow Hills with Madame Jacquot?... It's such an age..."
Ilya? Only fancy, I didn't know you at first. Do you remember how we
"Ah, Count Rostov!" exclaimed Pierre joyfully. "Then you are his son,

considerable pause which made Pierre feel uncomfortable.
"Count Rostov asks you to come to dinner today," said he, after a

embarrassment looked Pierre straight in the face.
necessary to introduce himself, and without experiencing the least
Boris felt that Pierre did not recognize him but did not consider it

Pierre, trying to remember who this young man was.
"Yes, it seems he is ill. People are always disturbing him," answered

come with my mother to see the count, but it seems he is not well."
"Do you remember me?" asked Boris quietly with a pleasant smile. "I have

smile.
impulsive and hearty way he took Boris by the hand with a friendly
was a boy of fourteen, and had quite forgotten him, but in his usual
officer entering his room. Pierre paused. He had left Moscow when Boris
pronounce Pitt's sentence, he saw a well-built and handsome young
dangerous crossing of the Straits of Dover and captured London--could
imagined himself to be Napoleon in person and to have just effected the
of man, is sentenced to..." But before Pierre--who at that moment
someone unseen. "Mr. Pitt, as a traitor to the nation and to the rights
"England is done for," said he, scowling and pointing his finger at

indistinct words, shrugging his shoulders and gesticulating.
over his spectacles, and then again resuming his walk, muttering
as if running a sword through an invisible foe, and glaring savagely
stopping occasionally at a corner to make menacing gestures at the wall,
When Boris appeared at his door Pierre was pacing up and down his room,

his rooms upstairs.
Since then Pierre had not been disturbed and had spent the whole time in

see him at all."
all I have to say to you. The count is very, very ill, and you must not
behave here as you did in Petersburg, you will end very badly; that is
sent for Pierre and said to him: "My dear fellow, if you are going to
Next day Prince Vasili had arrived and settled in the count's house. He

sister with the mole.
And he left the room, followed by the low but ringing laughter of the

him."
said: "Then I will go to my rooms. You will let me know when I can see
Olga went out. Pierre stood looking at the sisters; then he bowed and

busy causing him annoyance.
busy making his father comfortable, while evidently he, Pierre, was only
time," she added, giving Pierre to understand that they were busy, and
him... Olga, go and see whether Uncle's beef tea is ready--it is almost
"Hm.... If you wish to kill him, to kill him outright, you can see

"Can I see the count?" Pierre again asked.

done your best to increase his mental sufferings."
"The count is suffering physically and mentally, and apparently you have

unabashed.
"How is the count? Can I see him?" asked Pierre, awkwardly as usual, but

"I recognize you only too well, too well."

"How do you do, cousin?" said Pierre. "You don't recognize me?"

pattern.
able to refrain from laughing, stooped as if trying to make out the
she foresaw. She drew her wool down through the canvas and, scarcely
bent over her frame to hide a smile probably evoked by the amusing scene
the one with the mole, who was of a cheerful and lively disposition,
the second assumed precisely the same expression; while the youngest,
paused in her reading and silently stared at him with frightened eyes;
was received as if he were a corpse or a leper. The eldest princess
one had a little mole on her lip which made her much prettier. Pierre
embroidering: both were rosy and pretty and they differed only in that
reading--the one who had met Anna Mikhaylovna. The two younger ones were
embroidery frames while a third read aloud. It was the eldest who was
their time, he greeted the ladies, two of whom were sitting at
the house. Entering the drawing room, where the princesses spent most of
he nevertheless on the day of his arrival went to his father's part of
disposed toward him--would have used it to turn the count against him,
in Moscow and that the ladies about his father--who were never favorably
Though he expected that the story of his escapade would be already known
for some days in Moscow and was staying as usual at his father's house.
Pierre had taken part in tying a policeman to a bear. He had now been
sent to Moscow. The story told about him at Count Rostov's was true.
Petersburg, and had been expelled from there for riotous conduct and
Pierre, after all, had not managed to choose a career for himself in

CHAPTER XVI




stairs and up another, to Pierre's rooms.
He shrugged his shoulders. A footman conducted Boris down one flight of

he is, and the count has not once asked for him."
"I shall be only too glad if you relieve me of that young man.... Here
"On the contrary," replied the prince, who had plainly become depressed,

dinner. I suppose he won't go?" she continued, turning to the prince.
don't forget to give him the Rostovs' invitation. They ask him to
count, my uncle; but you, my dear, had better go to Pierre meanwhile and
"Boris," she said to her son with a smile, "I shall go in to see the

seat beside her.
conquered, settled down in an armchair, inviting Prince Vasili to take a
Anna Mikhaylovna took off her gloves and, occupying the position she had
The princess gave no reply and did not even smile, but left the room as

through," and she sympathetically turned up her eyes.
your service to help you nurse my uncle. I imagine what you have gone
smile, ambling lightly up to the count's niece. "I have come, and am at
"Ah, my dear, I hardly knew you," said Anna Mikhaylovna with a happy

princess, looking at Anna Mikhaylovna as at a stranger.
"Still the same; but what can you expect, this noise..." said the

"Well, how is he?"

to her.
was strikingly out of proportion to her short legs. Prince Vasili turned
count's niece, entered with a cold, stern face. The length of her body
A door of one of the inner rooms opened and one of the princesses, the

Christian..."
welfare of his soul is at stake. Ah, it is awful: the duties of a
"But one cannot delay, Prince, at such a moment! Consider that the

crisis."
said he. "Let us wait until evening. The doctors are expecting a
"Would not such a meeting be too trying for him, dear Anna Mikhaylovna?"

Mikhaylovna.
at Anna Pavlovna's, that it would be difficult to get rid of Anna
Evidently the prince understood her, and also understood, as he had done

am used to suffering."
things. I absolutely must see him, however painful it may be for me. I
women, Prince," and she smiled tenderly, "always know how to say these
worse, and it is absolutely necessary to prepare him if he is so ill. We
Prince? How priceless are those last moments! It can make things no
head and continued in a whisper: "Has he performed his final duty,
except the young princesses.... They are still young...." She bent her
his character: noble, upright... but you see he has no one with him
she, uttering the word with peculiar assurance and unconcern, "I know
"If it were not for my sincere affection and devotion to Uncle," said

and hastened to reassure him.
he was afraid of finding in her a rival for Count Bezukhov's fortune,
Prince Vasili became thoughtful and frowned. Anna Mikhaylovna saw that

ought to give Prince Vasili much satisfaction.
Boris. He is his godson," she added, her tone suggesting that this fact
"And I should so like to thank Uncle once for all his kindness to me and

"They give little hope," replied the prince.

expressing deep sorrow.
doctors say?" asked the princess after a pause, her worn face again
but asked him not to be too hard on the poor old man. "What do the
smile, as though she too knew that Count Rostov deserved this censure,
"But a very kind man, Prince," said Anna Mikhaylovna with a pathetic

I am told."
unlicked bear! A perfectly absurd and stupid fellow, and a gambler too,
never could understand how Nataly made up her mind to marry that
"I know, I know," answered Prince Vasili in his monotonous voice. "I

Mikhaylovna.
"That is, with Ilya Rostov who married Nataly Shinshina," said Anna

excellency."
"I am living at Countess Rostova's," replied Boris, again adding, "your

"Are you living with your mother?"

respectfully that the prince gave him a searching glance.
desire to enter into conversation, but speaking so quietly and
Boris, betraying neither annoyance at the prince's brusque manner nor a
"I am awaiting orders to join my new regiment, your excellency," replied

usual tone of indifference.
with severity. "I am glad.... Are you here on leave?" he went on in his
"Try to serve well and show yourself worthy," added he, addressing Boris

in Petersburg at Anna Scherer's reception.
obligation, assuming an air of much greater importance than he had done
here in Moscow to Anna Mikhaylovna whom he had placed under an
said Prince Vasili, arranging his lace frill, and in tone and manner,
"I am glad I was able to do you a service, my dear Anna Mikhaylovna,"

done for us."
"Believe me, Prince, a mother's heart will never forget what you have

Boris bowed again politely.

wanted to thank you himself."
terrible to think.... This is my son," she added, indicating Boris. "He
"Is it possible?" exclaimed Anna Mikhaylovna. "Oh, how awful! It is

lips indicating very little hope for the patient.
to Anna Mikhaylovna, answering her query by a movement of the head and
Boris bowed politely. Prince Vasili without acknowledging the bow turned
Prince Vasili stared at her and at Boris questioningly and perplexed.

fixed on her.
dear invalid?" said she, as though unaware of the cold offensive look
"Ah, Prince! In what sad circumstances we meet again! And how is our

mother's face, and he smiled slightly.
son noticed that an expression of profound sorrow suddenly clouded his
with a bow and approached them silently and with a look of inquiry. The
Seeing Anna Mikhaylovna and her son, Prince Vasili dismissed the doctor

"Very well, very well..."

* To err is human.


his r's, and pronouncing the Latin words with a French accent.
"Prince, humanum est errare, * but..." replied the doctor, swallowing

"Then it is certain?" said the prince.

man. This was the celebrated Petersburg doctor, Lorrain.
his custom when at home--taking leave of a good-looking, dark-haired
came out--wearing a velvet coat with a single star on his breast, as was
entered, the bronze handle of one of the doors turned and Prince Vasili
about to ask their way of an elderly footman who had sprung up as they
Just as the mother and son, having reached the middle of the hall, were

apartments assigned to Prince Vasili.
They entered the large hall, from which one of the doors led to the

The son, lowering his eyes, followed her quietly.

"you promised me!"
"My dear," she said to her son, once more stimulating him by a touch,

ascended the carpeted stairs.
Venetian mirror in the wall, and in her trodden-down shoes briskly
The mother smoothed the folds of her dyed silk dress before a large

ran downstairs and looked over from the halfway landing.
footman dressed in knee breeches, shoes, and a swallow-tail coat, who
"Princess Drubetskaya to see Prince Vasili Sergeevich," he called to a

away.
The hall porter sullenly pulled a bell that rang upstairs, and turned

Please announce me."
only need see Prince Vasili Sergeevich: he is staying here, is he not?
have come... I am a relation. I shall not disturb him, my friend... I
porter, "I know Count Cyril Vladimirovich is very ill... that's why I
"My friend," said Anna Mikhaylovna in gentle tones, addressing the hall

off his cloak.
Boris said no more, but looked inquiringly at his mother without taking

his arm as if that touch might soothe or rouse him.
"My dear!" exclaimed his mother imploringly, again laying her hand on

"We may as well go back," said the son in French.

today, and that his excellency was not receiving anyone.
hearing that they wished to see the count, said his excellency was worse
cloak, he asked whether they wanted the count or the princesses, and,
rows of statues in niches) and looking significantly at the lady's old
be announced had passed straight through the glass porch between the
entrance, after scrutinizing the mother and son (who without asking to
Although the hall porter saw someone's carriage standing at the

sake."
answered her son coldly. "But I have promised and will do it for your
"If only I knew that anything besides humiliation would come of it..."

to be."
him. Remember that, my dear, and be nice to him, as you so well know how
Cyril Vladimirovich is your godfather after all, your future depends on
tenderly on her son's arm, "be affectionate and attentive to him. Count
drawing her hand from beneath her old mantle and laying it timidly and
Vladimirovich Bezukhov's house. "My dear Boris," said the mother,
covered street and turned into the wide courtyard of Count Cyril
Rostova's carriage in which they were seated drove over the straw
"My dear Boris," said Princess Anna Mikhaylovna to her son as Countess

CHAPTER XV




never gave such a dinner as ours will be!"
will see how Taras distinguishes himself today. He says Count Orlov
know, and danced with the children. Be sure to invite him, my dear. We
is better, ask Pierre to dine with us. He has been to the house, you
coming out from the dining hall into the anteroom, and he added: "If he
"Are you going to Count Cyril Vladimirovich, my dear?" said the count

luck."
and added in a whisper so that her son should not hear, "Wish me good
"Good-bye, my dear," said she to the countess who saw her to the door,

anteroom with him.
time, Anna Mikhaylovna sent someone to call her son, and went into the
And like a practical Petersburg lady who knows how to make the most of

two o'clock and you dine at four. There will just be time."
same to me when my son's fate is at stake." The princess rose. "It's now
straight out. Let people think what they will of me, it's really all the
I will take Boris and go to see him at once, and I shall speak to him
"Heaven only knows, my dear! These rich grandees are so selfish. Still,

"Surely he will leave something to Boris," said the countess.

and Bory's life is only just beginning...."
tremendous fortune... and what is his life worth? It's a burden to him,
here lives Count Cyril Vladimirovich Bezukhov so rich, all alone... that
"I often think, though, perhaps it's a sin," said the princess, "that

The countess' eyes filled with tears and she pondered in silence.

thrown away.... I shall not be able to equip him."
allow him something for his maintenance, all my trouble will have been
he will not assist his godson--you know he is Bory's godfather--and
state.... My only hope now is in Count Cyril Vladimirovich Bezukhov. If
hundred rubles, and have only one twenty-five-ruble note. I am in such a
Boris." She took out her handkerchief and began to cry. "I need five
believe it, I have literally not a penny and don't know how to equip
"My wretched lawsuit takes all I have and makes no progress. Would you
a terrible one," continued Anna Mikhaylovna, sadly, dropping her voice.
happiness! And my affairs are in such a bad way that my position is now
Nataly, you know my love for my son: I would do anything for his
command.' Yes, he is a fine fellow and a very kind relation. But,
me, 'I am sorry I can do so little for you, dear Princess. I am at your
with amiability. His position has not turned his head at all. He said to
"He is just the same as ever," replied Anna Mikhaylovna, "overflowing

with a smile.
forgotten me. He paid me attentions in those days," said the countess,
since we acted together at the Rumyantsovs' theatricals. I expect he has
"Has Prince Vasili aged much?" asked the countess. "I have not seen him

to gain her end.
enthusiastically, quite forgetting all the humiliation she had endured
put the matter before the Emperor," said Princess Anna Mikhaylovna
"To Prince Vasili. He was so kind. He at once agreed to everything, and

did you apply?"
going as a cadet. There's no one to interest himself for him. To whom
see yours is already an officer in the Guards, while my Nicholas is
"Well, and to whom did you apply about Bory?" asked the countess. "You

till I get what I want. I don't mind what they think of me."
and-So,' and then I take a cab and go myself two, three, or four times--
people I write a note: 'Princess So-and-So desires an interview with So
pride. "That lawsuit taught me much. When I want to see one of those big
distraction! One learns many things then," she added with a certain
it is to be left a widow without means and with a son you love to
"Ah, my love," answered Anna Mikhaylovna, "God grant you never know what

get things settled? I couldn't possibly do it."
and know how to deal with them all! It's quite astonishing. How did you
carriage to Moscow, to Petersburg, to those ministers and great people,
wonder at you, Annette--how at your age you can rush off alone in a
don't let's talk about me; tell me how you managed everything. I often
get any rest? Theatricals, hunting, and heaven knows what besides! But
It's all the Club and his easygoing nature. Even in the country do we
Don't I know that at the rate we are living our means won't last long?
"Ah, my dear," said the countess, "my life is not all roses either.

In the drawing room the conversation was still going on.

her own handsome face she seemed to become still colder and calmer.
went to the looking glass and arranged her hair and scarf. Looking at
on everyone, smiled and, evidently unmoved by what had been said to her,
The handsome Vera, who produced such an irritating and unpleasant effect

the door.
"Madame de Genlis! Madame de Genlis!" shouted laughing voices through

anyone."
"The unpleasant things were said to me," remarked Vera, "I said none to

All four, like a flock of scared birds, got up and left the room.

unpleasant things to everyone and upset them. Let's go to the nursery."
"Well, now you've done what you wanted," put in Nicholas--"said

"I shall at any rate not run after a young man before visitors..."

finished quickly.
unpleasant to people! Go and flirt with Berg as much as you please," she
considered very stinging), "and your greatest pleasure is to be
nothing more" (this nickname, bestowed on Vera by Nicholas, was
never loved anyone. You have no heart! You are a Madame de Genlis and
added, turning to Vera, "You'll never understand it, because you've
special sense they attached to it.) "Why does she bother me?" And she
"diplomat," which was just then much in vogue among the children, in the
Natasha in a mortified voice that trembled slightly. (She used the word
"Don't, Boris! You are such a diplomat that it is really tiresome," said

nothing to complain of."
"Natalya Ilynichna behaves very well to me," remarked Boris. "I have

Boris."
wrong in my behavior. But I'll just tell Mamma how you are behaving with
"I should think not," said Vera, "because there can never be anything

don't interfere with you and Berg."
"All have secrets of their own," answered Natasha, getting warmer. "We

"Very silly," said Vera. "I am ashamed of you. Secrets indeed!"

everyone.
She seemed that day to be more than ever kind and affectionate to

speaking very gently.
"Now, Vera, what does it matter to you?" said Natasha in defense,

between you two? It's all nonsense!"
"And at your age what secrets can there be between Natasha and Boris, or

room with the inkstand in her hand.
replied, and the four simply looked at one another. She lingered in the
Though what she said was quite just, perhaps for that very reason no one

you."
came rushing into the drawing room so that everyone felt ashamed of
"You always manage to do things at the wrong time," continued Vera. "You

"In a minute, in a minute," he said, dipping his pen.

a room of your own," and she took the inkstand from Nicholas.
"How often have I asked you not to take my things?" she said. "You have

apparently the sight of them roused no pleasant feeling in Vera.
It was pleasant and touching to see these little girls in love; but

with guilty, happy faces.
and ceased talking when Vera entered. Sonya and Natasha looked at Vera
first he had ever written. Boris and Natasha were at the other window
sitting close to Nicholas who was copying out some verses for her, the
pair at each window. She stopped and smiled scornfully. Sonya was
But as she passed the sitting room she noticed two couples sitting, one

she rose to go to her own room.
"If you had told me sooner, Mamma, I would have gone," she replied as

The handsome Vera smiled contemptuously but did not seem at all hurt.

wanted here? Go to the other girls, or..."
favorite, "how is it you have so little tact? Don't you see you are not
"Vera," she said to her eldest daughter who was evidently not a

friend's hand.
Anna Mikhaylovna looked at Vera and paused. The countess pressed her

many left of us old friends! That's why I so value your friendship."
"With you I will be quite frank," said Anna Mikhaylovna. "There are not

her chair nearer to that of the countess.
Petersburg. Anna Mikhaylovna, with her tear-worn but pleasant face, drew
Mikhaylovna, whom she had not seen properly since she returned from
tete-a-tete talk with the friend of her childhood, Princess Anna
dinner all who came "to congratulate." The countess wished to have a
orders to admit no more, but the porter was told to be sure to invite to
After receiving her visitors, the countess was so tired that she gave

CHAPTER XIV




sitting room.
She took his arm and with a happy face went with him into the adjoining

"Forever?" said the little girl. "Till death itself?"

"Settled!" replied Boris.

A smile of joy and satisfaction lit up her eager face.

little fingers. "All right! Then it's settled?"
"Thirteen, fourteen, fifteen, sixteen," she counted on her slender

Natasha considered.

years... then I will ask for your hand."
"Yes, I am, but please don't let us do like that.... In another four

"You are in love with me?" Natasha broke in.

"Natasha," he said, "you know that I love you, but..."

and stood, hanging her head.
Then she slipped down among the flowerpots on the other side of the tubs

back her hair, kissed him full on the lips.
that both her slender bare arms clasped him above his neck, and, tossing
Suddenly she jumped up onto a tub to be higher than he, embraced him so

more, but he waited and did nothing.
"How funny you are!" he said, bending down to her and blushing still

Boris blushed.

excitement.
glancing up at him from under her brows, smiling, and almost crying from
"And me? Would you like to kiss me?" she whispered almost inaudibly,

fear appeared on her flushed face.
She caught the young officer by his cuffs, and a look of solemnity and

whispered.
in among the plants and threw down the doll. "Closer, closer!" she
"Don't you want to? Well, then, come here," said she, and went further

reply.
Boris looked attentively and kindly at her eager face, but did not

"Kiss the doll," said she.

down on one of the tubs, picked it up.
She grew confused, glanced round, and, seeing the doll she had thrown

"What is the something?" asked he.

Boris followed her, smiling.

conservatory to the place among the tubs where she had been hiding.
something to tell you. Here, here!" and she led him into the
"Boris, come here," said she with a sly and significant look. "I have

out of the conservatory she followed and called Boris to her.
"Oh, how nice," thought Natasha; and when Sonya and Nicholas had gone

kissed her.
"Well, then, I won't; only forgive me, Sonya!" He drew her to him and

"I don't like you to talk like that."

said Nicholas. "And I will prove it to you."
"Sonya! What is anyone in the world to me? You alone are everything!"

"What will happen now?" thought she.
and scarcely breathing, watched from her ambush with sparkling eyes.
Sonya did not pull it away, and left off crying. Natasha, not stirring

for a mere fancy?" said Nicholas taking her hand.
"So-o-onya! Look here! How can you torture me and yourself like that,

"Well, if you do, so much the better, and you can go back to her!"

"Ah, I know what it is."

"It's nothing, nothing; leave me alone!" sobbed Sonya.

to her.
"Sonya, what is the matter with you? How can you?" said he, running up

round toward the drawing-room door. It opened and Nicholas came in.
new and peculiar pleasure. Sonya, muttering to herself, kept looking
invisible cap--to see what went on in the world. She was experiencing a
run out to her, and remained in her hiding place, watching--as under an
angrily, came in at the other door. Natasha checked her first impulse to
Hardly had Boris gone than Sonya, flushed, in tears, and muttering
call him but changed her mind. "Let him look for me," thought she.
glass, smiled, and walked toward the other door. Natasha was about to
waiting to see what he would do. He stood a little while before the
his handsome face. Natasha, very still, peered out from her ambush,
dust from the sleeve of his uniform, and going up to a mirror examined
Boris paused in the middle of the room, looked round, brushed a little

flower tubs and hid there.
neither quickly nor slowly. At this Natasha dashed swiftly among the
at once, when she heard the young man's discreet steps approaching
growing impatient, and stamped her foot, ready to cry at his not coming
in the drawing room, waiting for Boris to come out. She was already
conservatory. There she paused and stood listening to the conversation
When Natasha ran out of the drawing room she only went as far as the

CHAPTER XIII




she had seen her guests out.
"What manners! I thought they would never go," said the countess, when

The guests got up and took their leave, promising to return to dinner.

splendidly all the same," he added, winking at Vera.
clever with Vera," said the count. "Well, what of that? She's turned out
"What's the good of denying it, my dear? Our dear countess was too

something exceptional of them," said the visitor.
"People are always too clever with their eldest children and try to make

it, and they all felt awkward.
countess alike--turned to look at her as if wondering why she had said
and appropriate, yet, strange to say, everyone--the visitors and
was well-brought up, and had a pleasant voice; what she said was true
expression. Vera was good-looking, not at all stupid, quick at learning,
the contrary it gave her an unnatural, and therefore unpleasant,
But the smile did not enhance Vera's beauty as smiles generally do; on

daughter, Countess Vera, with a smile.
"Yes, I was brought up quite differently," remarked the handsome elder

really that seems the best plan. With her elder sister I was stricter."
accord in the evening and tell me everything. Perhaps I spoil her, but
know every word she utters. She will come running to me of her own
to on the sly" (she meant that they would be kissing), "but as it is, I
severe with her and to forbid it... goodness knows what they might be up
with a thought that always occupied her: "Now you see if I were to be
with a gentle smile, looking at Boris and went on, evidently concerned
"And she's in love with Boris already. Just fancy!" said the countess

to be married at twelve or thirteen."
"Oh no, not at all too young!" replied the count. "Why, our mothers used

at that age."
"Isn't she too young? I have heard that it harms the voice to train it

give her lessons."
she'll be a singer, a second Salomoni! We have engaged an Italian to
voice she has; though she's my daughter, I tell the truth when I say
"Yes, a regular volcano," said the count. "Takes after me! And what a

little volcano!"
"What a charming creature your younger girl is," said the visitor; "a

to do, my dear?"
everything was splendid. "Just fancy: wants to be an hussar. What's one
always solved questions that seemed to him perplexing by deciding that
"Yes, they are splendid, splendid youngsters," chimed in the count, who

all the same never be like those Petersburg young men."
impulsive nature, does get into mischief (a boy can't help it), he will
always be my daughters' first confidante, and that if Nicholas, with his
imagine that their children have no secrets from them. "I know I shall
confidence," said she, repeating the mistake of so many parents who
always, thank God, been my children's friend and had their full
"Yes, you're quite right," continued the countess. "Till now I have

"It all depends on the bringing up," remarked the visitor.

for girls and boys."
always, always anxious! Especially just at this age, so dangerous both
now! And yet really the anxiety is greater now than the joy. One is
how much anxiety one has had to go through that we might rejoice in them
one had put but which was always in her mind, "and how much suffering,
brought into the room had vanished; and as if answering a question no
"Yes," said the countess when the brightness these young people had

* Cousinhood is a dangerous neighborhood.


dangereux voisinage;" * she added.
said Anna Mikhaylovna, pointing to Nicholas as he went out. "Cousinage--
"How plainly all these young people wear their hearts on their sleeves!"

with a distressed face left the room to find Sonya.
vanished. He waited for the first pause in the conversation, and then
her lips, she got up and left the room. All Nicholas' animation
hardly able to restrain her tears and maintain the artificial smile on
he glanced round at her. She gave him a passionately angry glance, and
of Sonya, who blushed and smiled unnaturally. In the midst of his talk
without at all noticing that his involuntary smile had stabbed the heart
smile, and engaged the smiling Julie in a confidential conversation
The young man, flattered, sat down nearer to her with a coquettish

without you," said she, giving him a tender smile.
"What a pity you weren't at the Arkharovs' on Thursday. It was so dull

Rostov.
The elders began talking about Bonaparte. Julie Karagina turned to young

not noticing his visitor's sarcastic smile.
from an ensign and became Emperor. Well, well, God grant it," he added,
Buonaparte has turned all their heads; they all think of how he rose
"All right, all right!" said the old count. "He always flares up! This

to start her gambols again and display her kittenish nature.
The little kitten, feasting her eyes on him, seemed ready at any moment

of a handsome youth at Sonya and the young lady visitor.
hide what I feel." As he spoke he kept glancing with the flirtatiousness
army; I am not a diplomat or a government clerk.--I don't know how to
to let me go, I'll stay. But I know I am no use anywhere except in the
"I have already told you, Papa," said his son, "that if you don't wish

speaking playfully of a matter that evidently distressed him.
It can't be helped!" said the count, shrugging his shoulders and
today. He has been here on leave and is taking Nicholas back with him.
"Schubert, the colonel of the Pavlograd Hussars, is dining with us

regarding him with a smile of approbation.
He glanced at his cousin and the young lady visitor; and they were both

at all; I simply feel that the army is my vocation."
turning away as if from a shameful aspersion. "It is not from friendship
"It's not at all from friendship," declared Nicholas, flaring up and

The visitor, not knowing what to say, shook her head.

friendship for you," he repeated. "He's joining the hussars."
so again and again, and that will be the end of it. My dear, there's
"They've been saying so a long while," said the count, "and they'll say

"But they say that war has been declared," replied the visitor.

friendship?" remarked the count in an inquiring tone.
everything waiting for him in the Archives Department! Isn't that
and entering the military service, my dear. And there was a place and
friendship's sake he is leaving the university and me, his old father,
to Nicholas, "his friend Boris has become an officer, and so for
"Ah yes, my dear," said the count, addressing the visitor and pointing

Natasha and Boris, escape from the drawing room.
energy and again play with her cousin as soon as they too could, like
clear that the kitten had settled down only to spring up with more
her smile could not for a single instant impose upon anyone, and it was
was going to join the army, with such passionate girlish adoration that
herself her eyes under their thick long lashes watched her cousin who
show an interest in the general conversation by smiling, but in spite of
to become a beautiful little cat. She evidently considered it proper to
manner, she reminded one of a pretty, half-grown kitten which promises
flexibility of her small limbs, and by a certain coyness and reserve of
arms and neck. By the grace of her movements, by the softness and
and especially in the color of her slender but graceful and muscular
plaits coiling twice round her head, and a tawny tint in her complexion
a tender look in her eyes which were veiled by long lashes, thick black
Nicholas and Sonya, the niece. Sonya was a slender little brunette with
older than her sister and behaved already like a grown-up person), were
young lady visitor and the countess' eldest daughter (who was four years
The only young people remaining in the drawing room, not counting the

CHAPTER XII




disturbed.
ran after them angrily, as if vexed that their program had been
Boris quietly left the room and went in search of Natasha. The plump boy

his smile.
"Yes, yes, go and tell them to get it ready," she answered, returning

carriage?" he asked his mother with a smile.
"You were meaning to go out, weren't you, Mamma? Do you want the

fast as her nimble little feet would carry her. Boris did not laugh.
control herself any longer, she jumped up and rushed from the room as
screwing up his eyes and shaking with suppressed laughter, and unable to
turned away from him and glanced at her younger brother, who was
right across the skull. Having said this he glanced at Natasha. She
during the five years he had known her, and how her head had cracked
still quite a young lady, before her nose was broken; how she had aged
quietly and humorously how he had known that doll Mimi when she was
failed. Boris on the contrary at once found his footing, and related
the drawing room. He evidently tried to find something to say, but
expressed impetuosity and enthusiasm. Nicholas blushed when he entered
Dark hairs were already showing on his upper lip, and his whole face
features. Nicholas was short with curly hair and an open expression.
was tall and fair, and his calm and handsome face had regular, delicate
were of the same age and both handsome fellows, though not alike. Boris
The two young men, the student and the officer, friends from childhood,

able to suppress their laughter.
Countess Apraksina. Now and then they glanced at one another, hardly
than the drawing-room talk of society scandals, the weather, and
had dashed out so impetuously, the conversation had been more amusing
shone in all their faces. Evidently in the back rooms, from which they
restrain within the bounds of decorum the excitement and mirth that
all settled down in the drawing room and were obviously trying to
count's fifteen-year-old niece, and little Petya, his youngest boy, had
son; Nicholas, the undergraduate, the count's eldest son; Sonya, the
Meanwhile the younger generation: Boris, the officer, Anna Mikhaylovna's

things. She did not reply, but looked at her seriously.
Natasha did not like the visitor's tone of condescension to childish

daughter, I suppose?"
"Tell me, my dear," said she to Natasha, "is Mimi a relation of yours? A

necessary to take some part in it.
The visitor, compelled to look on at this family scene, thought it

glanced up at her through tears of laughter, and again hid her face.
Natasha, raising her face for a moment from her mother's mantilla,

visitor she added: "She is my youngest girl."
pushing away her daughter with pretended sternness, and turning to the
"Now then, go away and take your monstrosity with you," said the mother,

visitor could not help joining in.
and burst into such a loud, ringing fit of laughter that even the prim
to utter (to her everything seemed funny). She leaned against her mother
"Do you see?... My doll... Mimi... You see..." was all Natasha managed

folds of her frock.
sentences tried to explain about a doll which she produced from the
severe remark--and began to laugh. She laughed, and in fragmentary
lace of her mother's mantilla--not paying the least attention to her
woman. Escaping from her father she ran to hide her flushed face in the
when a girl is no longer a child, though the child is not yet a young
frilled drawers, and feet in low slippers--was just at that charming age
with black curls tossed backward, thin bare arms, little legs in lace-
childish bare shoulders which after her run heaved and shook her bodice,
This black-eyed, wide-mouthed girl, not pretty but full of life--with

the mother.
day," said the visitor. "What a charming child," she added, addressing
"How do you do, my dear? I wish you many happy returns of your name

husband.
feigned severity. "You spoil her, Ilya," she added, turning to her
"Ma chere, there is a time for everything," said the countess with

My dear pet!"
"Ah, here she is!" he exclaimed laughing. "My pet, whose name day it is.

and threw them round the little girl who had run in.
The count jumped up and, swaying from side to side, spread his arms wide

a girl of fifteen, and a plump rosy-faced boy in a short jacket.
appeared a student with a crimson coat collar, an officer of the Guards,
intended her flight to bring her so far. Behind her in the doorway
stopped short in the middle of the room. It was evident that she had not
hiding something in the folds of her short muslin frock, darted in and
door and the noise of a chair falling over, and a girl of thirteen,
the next room were heard the footsteps of boys and girls running to the
down her dress with an inquiring look at her mother, when suddenly from
rose and took their leave. The visitor's daughter was already smoothing
not concealing the fact that she would not be distressed if they now
Silence ensued. The countess looked at her callers, smiling affably, but

CHAPTER XI




said.
well and, in particular, drinks well. "So do come and dine with us!" he
again shook with a deep ringing laugh, the laugh of one who always eats
And as he waved his arms to impersonate the policeman, his portly form

ladies. "I can just imagine what a funny figure that policeman cut!"
seeing that the elder visitor was not listening, he turned to the young
"But do you know, my dear, that was a capital joke," said the count; and

is."
fact is he has come to see Count Cyril Vladimirovich, hearing how ill he
"Yes, but between ourselves," said the princess, "that is a pretext. The

inspection business," remarked the visitor.
"Prince Vasili arrived in Moscow yesterday. I hear he has come on some

if she attached no importance at all to the fact.
my mother's second cousin. He's also my Bory's godfather," she added, as
well for Prince Vasili told me himself. Besides, Cyril Vladimirovich is
Vasili. Forty thousand serfs and millions of rubles! I know it all very
-no one knows who will inherit his immense fortune, Pierre or Prince
that he may die at any moment, and Dr. Lorrain has come from Petersburg-
Emperor about him; so that in the case of his death--and he is so ill
is very fond of Pierre, looked after his education, and wrote to the
saying, Prince Vasili is the next heir through his wife, but the count
"He is very much altered now," said Anna Mikhaylovna. "Well, as I was

countess. "I have never seen a handsomer man."
"How handsome the old man still was only a year ago!" remarked the

of his children, but this Pierre was his favorite."
whisper, "everyone knows Count Cyril's reputation.... He has lost count
"The fact of the matter is," said she significantly, and also in a half

society.
wishing to show her connections and knowledge of what went on in
Princess Anna Mikhaylovna intervened in the conversation, evidently

"I should think he has a score of them."

The visitor made a gesture with her hand.

children are all illegitimate. I think Pierre also is illegitimate."
away from the girls, who at once assumed an air of inattention. "His
"Why do you say this young man is so rich?" asked the countess, turning

my daughters to consider."
money. They wanted to introduce him to me, but I quite declined: I have
him! I hope that here in Moscow no one will receive him, in spite of his
educated and clever. This is all that his foreign education has done for
amuses himself in this sensible manner! And he was said to be so well
visitor. "And to think it is Cyril Vladimirovich Bezukhov's son who
"It was all they could do to rescue the poor man," continued the

Yet the ladies themselves could not help laughing.

"Oh, how dreadful! How can you laugh at it, Count?"

count, dying with laughter.
"What a nice figure the policeman must have cut, my dear!" shouted the

was the bear swimming about with the policeman on his back!"
the bear back to back and put the bear into the Moyka Canal. And there
to interfere, and what did the young men do? They tied a policeman and
carriage, and set off with it to visit some actresses! The police tried
there, just fancy! Those three got hold of a bear somewhere, put it in a
"He is a son of Marya Ivanovna Dolokhova, such a worthy woman, but
"They are regular brigands, especially Dolokhov," replied the visitor.

"But what have they been up to?" asked the countess.

up, but even he was ordered out of Petersburg."
Anatole Kuragin's father managed somehow to get his son's affair hushed
been degraded to the ranks and Bezukhov's son sent back to Moscow.
heaven only knows what! And they have had to suffer for it. Dolokhov has
Vasili's son, he, and a certain Dolokhov have, it is said, been up to
"He chose his friends badly," interposed Anna Mikhaylovna. "Prince

"You don't say so!" replied the countess.

that he has been expelled by the police."
liked, now in Petersburg I hear he has been doing such terrible things
seems that while he was abroad this young man was allowed to do as he
"That's what comes of a modern education," exclaimed the visitor. "It

Count Bezukhov's distress some fifteen times.
visitor alluded to, though she had already heard about the cause of
"What is that?" asked the countess as if she did not know what the

health, and now this vexation about his son is enough to kill him!"
"I am so sorry for the poor count," said the visitor. "He is in such bad

so improperly at Anna Pavlovna's reception.
Bezukhov, and about his illegitimate son Pierre, the one who had behaved
illness of the wealthy and celebrated beau of Catherine's day, Count
and drive away. The conversation was on the chief topic of the day: the
then, again rustling, pass into the anteroom, put on cloaks or mantles,
am so delighted... Mamma's health... and Countess Apraksina..." and
at the first pause, the guests rise with a rustle of dresses and say, "I
of chairs. Then one of those conversations began which last out until,
one another and mingling with the rustling of dresses and the scraping
delighted..." came the sounds of animated feminine voices, interrupting
the Razumovski's ball... and Countess Apraksina... I was so
"Dear Countess, what an age... She has been laid up, poor child... at

daughter, entered the drawing room, their dresses rustling.
A tall, stout, and proud-looking woman, with a round-faced smiling

as if saying: "Very well, finish me off."
She is so affected. Ask her in," she said to the footman in a sad voice,
"I'm quite worn out by these callers. However, I'll see her and no more.

her husband's portrait on it.
countess reflected a moment and took a pinch from a gold snuffbox with
gigantic footman in his bass voice, entering the drawing room. The
"Marya Lvovna Karagina and her daughter!" announced the countess'

complacent sigh he would return to the drawing room.
be? That's right! The great thing is the serving, that's it." And with a
would say: "Well, Dmitri, you'll see that things are all as they should
all his affairs, and while looking with pleasure at the enormous table
would call Dmitri Vasilevich, a man of good family and the manager of
silver and china, moving tables, and unfolding damask table linen, he
out for eighty people; and looking at the footmen, who were bringing in
pantry into the large marble dining hall, where tables were being set
way back from the anteroom he would pass through the conservatory and
hairs over his bald patch, also asked them to dinner. Sometimes on his
of duty, he rose to see some visitors off and, stroking his scanty gray
French; then again, like a man weary but unflinching in the fulfillment
sometimes in Russian and sometimes in very bad but self-confident
offered surmises about the weather, or touched on questions of health,
enjoys life and knows how to live, he swayed to and fro with dignity,
his legs and putting his hands on his knees with the air of a man who
drawing room, drew a chair toward him or her, and jauntily spreading out
had seen a visitor off he returned to one of those who were still in the
pressure of the hand and the same quick, repeated bows. As soon as he
expression on his full, cheerful, clean-shaven face, the same firm
repeated to everyone without exception or variation, and with the same
of the whole family I beg you to come, mon cher!" These words he
But mind you come to dinner or I shall be offended, ma chere! On behalf
you for myself and for our two dear ones whose name day we are keeping.
tone, "my dear," whether they were above or below him in rank--"I thank
everyone without exception and without the slightest variation in his
"I am very, very grateful to you, mon cher," or "ma chere"--he called

them off, inviting them all to dinner.
take part in receiving the visitors. The count met the guests and saw
people were in one of the inner rooms, not considering it necessary to
drawing room, helped to receive and entertain the visitors. The young
Drubetskaya, who as a member of the household was also seated in the
distinguished air which inspired respect. Princess Anna Mikhaylovna
languor of motion and speech, resulting from weakness, gave her a
of face, evidently worn out with childbearing--she had had twelve. A
The countess was a woman of about forty-five, with a thin Oriental type

relays.
who came to congratulate, and who constantly succeeded one another in
her handsome eldest daughter were in the drawing-room with the visitors
the Povarskaya, so well known to all Moscow. The countess herself and
continually, bringing visitors to the Countess Rostova's big house on
morning, carriages with six horses had been coming and going
mother and the youngest daughter--both named Nataly. Ever since the
It was St. Natalia's day and the name day of two of the Rostovs--the

on the march to Radzivilov.
her son, who had remained in Moscow for his equipment, was to join them
time. The Guards had already left Petersburg on the tenth of August, and
a cornet, had been educated from childhood and lived for years at a
regiment of the line and was being at once transferred to the Guards as
in the town and where her darling Bory, who had only just entered a
straight to her rich relations, the Rostovs, with whom she stayed when
Pavlovna's reception Anna Mikhaylovna returned to Moscow and went
despite all Anna Mikhaylovna's endeavors and entreaties. Soon after Anna
rank of cornet. He received, however, no appointment to Kutuzov's staff
made, and Boris transferred into the regiment of Semenov Guards with the
Pavlovna's soiree. The matter was mentioned to the Emperor, an exception
had spoken to him on behalf of her only son Boris on the evening of Anna
Prince Vasili kept the promise he had given to Princess Drubetskaya who

CHAPTER X




and began dancing round the room with it.
And he caught the bear, took it in his arms, lifted it from the ground,

us."
"Come on then," cried Pierre. "Come on!... And we'll take Bruin with

are all going to ----'s."
I'll get round him.... Listen! I'll take your bet tomorrow, but now we
"No, you'll never manage him that way," said Anatole. "Wait a bit and

touched him was sent flying.
They seized him by his arms; but he was so strong that everyone who

of the window.
table with a determined and drunken gesture and preparing to climb out
"I'll drink it! Let's have a bottle of rum!" shouted Pierre, banging the

giddy even on a staircase," exclaimed several voices.
"What next? Have you gone mad?... No one would let you!... Why, you go

"Let him do it, let him do it," said Dolokhov, smiling.

bottle. I'll do it.... Bring a bottle!"
suddenly cried. "Even without a bet, there! Tell them to bring me a
"Gentlemen, who wishes to bet with me? I'll do the same thing!" he

sill.
Dolokhov stood frowning and did not speak. Pierre jumped upon the window
The Englishman took out his purse and began counting out the money.

you!" came from different sides.
"Well done!... Fine fellow!... There's a bet for you!... Devil take

jumped down. He smelt strongly of rum.
He threw the bottle to the Englishman, who caught it neatly. Dolokhov

"It's empty."

radiant face.
He looked up: Dolokhov was standing on the window sill, with a pale but
would never open them again. Suddenly he was aware of a stir all around.
refrained from touching it. Pierre again covered his eyes and thought he
with the strain. One hand moved as if to clutch the window sill, but
ledge. As he began slipping down, his head and arm wavered still more
was sufficient to cause his whole body to slip as he sat on the sloping
backward movement with his spine, and his arm trembled nervously; this
to him that more than half an hour had elapsed. Suddenly Dolokhov made a
tilting yet further back. "Why is it so long?" thought Pierre. It seemed
bottle was emptying perceptibly and rising still higher and his head
bottle was lifted higher and higher and trembled with the effort. The
till his curly hair touched his shirt collar, and the hand holding the
still sat in the same position, only his head was thrown further back
fear. All were still. Pierre took his hands from his eyes. Dolokhov
faint smile forgot to fade though his features now expressed horror and
on a sofa with his face to the wall. Pierre hid his face, from which a
wished to stop the affair ran to a corner of the room and threw himself
The Englishman looked on sideways, pursing up his lips. The man who had
window and from Dolokhov's back. Anatole stood erect with staring eyes.
broken glass remained in that position without taking his eyes from the
to balance himself. One of the footmen who had stooped to pick up some
and lifted it to his lips, threw back his head, and raised his free hand
Saying this he again turned round, dropped his hands, took the bottle

then!"
through his thin compressed lips, "I will throw him down there. Now
"If anyone comes meddling again," said he, emitting the words separately

himself on his seat.
Dolokhov turned round and, again holding on with both hands, arranged

What then?... Eh?"
"Don't touch him! You'll startle him and then he'll be killed. Eh?...

Anatole stopped him.

"I say, this is folly! He'll be killed," said this more sensible man.

hold of Dolokhov's shirt.
suddenly pushed forward with a scared and angry look and wanted to seize
stood smiling but silent. One man, older than the others present,
sides. Everyone crowded to the window, the Englishman in front. Pierre
back in his white shirt, and his curly head, were lit up from both
them on the window sill, though it was already quite light. Dolokhov's
left, and took up the bottle. Anatole brought two candles and placed
his seat, lowered his hands, moved a little to the right and then to the
legs. Pressing against both sides of the window, he adjusted himself on
Dolokhov climbed carefully and slowly through the window and lowered his
Placing the bottle on the window sill where he could reach it easily,

jumped awkwardly back into the room, tripping over his spurs.
"Shut up!" cried Dolokhov, pushing him away from the window. The lad

the pavement.
"Oh! Oh! Oh!" he muttered, looking down from the window at the stones of

leaned over, and looked down.
Guards, who had been losing that evening, climbed on the window sill,
Dolokhov's words into English. A thin young lad, an hussar of the Life
kept nodding to show that he understood, Anatole went on translating
accept this challenge or not. Anatole did not release him, and though he
The Englishman nodded, but gave no indication whether he intended to

same, I will pay him a hundred imperials. Do you understand?"
attract attention. "Wait a bit, Kuragin. Listen! If anyone else does the
"Wait!" cried Dolokhov, hammering with the bottle on the window sill to

repeating the terms of the wager to him in English.
his coat and looking down at him--the Englishman was short--began
Anatole turned to the Englishman and taking him by one of the buttons of

"Quite right," said the Englishman.

"and without holding on to anything. Is that right?"
spot" (he stooped and pointed to the sloping ledge outside the window)
without taking it from my mouth, sitting outside the window on this
"All right. Fifty imperials... that I will drink a whole bottle of rum

"No, fifty," replied the latter.

the Englishman.
imperials... or do you wish to make it a hundred?" added he, addressing
understand him, but he did not speak it very well--"I bet fifty
"I bet fifty imperials"--he spoke French that the Englishman might

room. All were silent.
sill. "Listen!" cried he, standing there and addressing those in the
Dolokhov, the bottle of rum still in his hand, jumped onto the window

the dawn merging with the afterglow of sunset, was visible.
in his hand was approaching the window, from which the light of the sky,
"First-rate," said Pierre, looking at Dolokhov, who with a bottle of rum

"Is the Englishman bragging?... Eh? Is it all right?" said Anatole.

"Take it right out, or they'll think I'm holding on," said Dolokhov.

a crash.
Pierre seized the crossbeam, tugged, and wrenched the oak frame out with

"You have a try, Hercules," said he, turning to Pierre.

could not move it. He smashed a pane.
smash something. Pushing away the footmen he tugged at the frame, but
Anatole with his swaggering air strode up to the window. He wanted to

the gentlemen around.
were evidently flurried and intimidated by the directions and shouts of
from sitting on the outer sill was being forced out by two footmen, who
The bottle of rum was brought. The window frame which prevented anyone

of Petersburg.
and Dolokhov were at that time notorious among the rakes and scapegraces
However much he drank, he never lost his clearheadedness. Both Kuragin
they did Anatole. Dolokhov could play all games and nearly always won.
all who knew them, including Anatole himself, respected him more than
Dolokhov lived with him and had placed himself on such a footing that
no connections. Yet, though Anatole spent tens of thousands of rubles,
impossible not to notice his face. Dolokhov was a man of small means and
insolent intelligence of his eyes, produced an effect which made it
round the two corners of the mouth; this, together with the resolute,
lower one, and something like two distinct smiles played continually
of the upper lip formed a sharp wedge and closed firmly on the firm
seen. The lines of that mouth were remarkably finely curved. The middle
so that his mouth, the most striking feature of his face, was clearly
was about twenty-five. Like all infantry officers he wore no mustache,
Dolokhov was of medium height, with curly hair and light-blue eyes. He

Anatole and Pierre.
repeating the terms of the bet, addressing himself particularly to
Dolokhov was holding the Englishman's hand and clearly and distinctly

window.
"No, I won't," said Pierre, pushing Anatole aside, and he went up to the

glass, "or I won't let you go!"
"Go on, you must drink it all," said Anatole, giving Pierre the last

of the third floor window with his legs hanging out.
officer, that he would drink a bottle of rum sitting on the outer ledge
explaining that Dolokhov was betting with Stevens, an English naval
to their chatter. Anatole kept on refilling Pierre's glass while
the tipsy guests who were again crowding round the window, and listening
Pierre drank one glass after another, looking from under his brows at

"First of all you must drink!"

glass from the table he went up to Pierre.
"Wait a bit, he is not drunk yet! A bottle here," said Anatole, taking a

"I don't understand. What's it all about?"

was living with Anatole. Pierre smiled, looking about him merrily.
officer of the Semenov regiment, a notorious gambler and duelist, who
cried from the window: "Come here; part the bets!" This was Dolokhov, an
particularly striking among all these drunken voices by its sober ring,
Another voice, from a man of medium height with clear blue eyes,

Good man!" cried he, addressing Pierre.
shirt unfastened in front. "Wait a bit, you fellows.... Here is Petya!
stood in the midst of the group, without a coat, and with his fine linen
"Jacob, bring a bottle!" shouted the host, a tall, handsome fellow who

"At one draught, or he loses!" shouted a fourth.

"There, leave Bruin alone; here's a bet on."

"I bet on Dolokhov!" cried a third. "Kuragin, you part our hands."

"Mind, no holding on!" cried another.

"I bet a hundred on Stevens!" shouted one.

pulling him by the chain and trying to set him at the others.
round an open window. Three others were romping with a young bear, one
general commotion. Some eight or nine young men were crowding anxiously
laughter, the shouting of familiar voices, the growling of a bear, and
the sly what was left in the glasses. From the third room came sounds of
remains of supper. A footman, thinking no one saw him, was drinking on
Pierre threw off his cloak and entered the first room, in which were the
Cards and supper were over, but the visitors had not yet dispersed.

alcohol, and sounds of voices and shouting in the distance.
bottles, cloaks, and overshoes were lying about; there was a smell of
and went in at the open door. There was no one in the anteroom; empty
Anatole lived, Pierre entered the lighted porch, ascended the stairs,
Reaching the large house near the Horse Guards' barracks, in which

Kuragin's.
this sort, nullifying all his decisions and intentions. He went to
dishonor will be all the same!" Pierre often indulged in reflections of
be dead, or something so extraordinary may happen to one that honor and
definite meaning, especially if one considers that by tomorrow one may
thought he, "all such 'words of honor' are conventional things with no
had already promised Prince Anatole to come to his gathering; "besides,"
promise to Prince Andrew was of no account, because before he gave it he
that he decided to go. The thought immediately occurred to him that his
passionately once more to enjoy that dissipation he was so accustomed to
there. Then, as happens to people of weak character, he desired so
But he immediately recalled his promise to Prince Andrew not to go

"I should like to go to Kuragin's," thought he.

was very fond of.
was generally a drinking bout, finishing with visits of a kind Pierre
was expecting the usual set for cards that evening, after which there
evening than night. On the way Pierre remembered that Anatole Kuragin
see a long way in the deserted street and it seemed more like morning or
impossibility of going to sleep on such a night. It was light enough to
straight home. But the nearer he drew to the house the more he felt the
northern, summer night. Pierre took an open cab intending to drive
It was past one o'clock when Pierre left his friend. It was a cloudless,

CHAPTER IX




"On my honor!"

"You give me your word of honor not to go?"

spends all one's money. He asked me for tonight, but I won't go."
can't decide or think properly about anything. One's head aches, and one
"seriously, I have long been thinking of it.... Leading such a life I
"Do you know?" said Pierre, as if suddenly struck by a happy thought,

marrying him to Prince Andrew's sister.
life of his son Anatole, the son whom they were planning to reform by
Pierre was staying at Prince Vasili Kuragin's and sharing the dissipated

and wine' I don't understand!"
faut, that's a different matter; but the Kuragins' set of women, 'women
"I don't understand it," replied Prince Andrew. "Women who are comme il

shoulders. "Women, my dear fellow; women!"
"What would you have, my dear fellow?" answered Pierre, shrugging his

this debauchery, dissipation, and the rest of it!"
those Kuragins and leading that sort of life. It suits you so badly--all
same. You'll be all right anywhere. But look here: give up visiting
whole set. Yes, you're all right! Choose what you will; it's all the
"I am fond of you, especially as you are the one live man among our

affectionate as it was--expressed a sense of his own superiority.
Prince Andrew looked kindly at him, yet his glance--friendly and

consult you seriously."
right. Only I haven't the least idea what I am to do; I wanted to
not say what "it really" was. "For the present I am free and am all
this. "Without a name and without means... And it really..." But he did
blushed crimson, and it was plain that he had made a great effort to say
a careless, merry smile. "What am I? An illegitimate son!" He suddenly
"But what is there to say about me?" said Pierre, his face relaxing into

That smile was immediately reflected on Pierre's face.

his reassuring thoughts.
about me? Let us talk about you," he added after a silence, smiling at
"My part is played out," said Prince Andrew. "What's the use of talking

that they may run smoothly.
and commendation are essential, just as grease is necessary to wheels
Even in the best, most friendly and simplest relations of life, praise

strength.
addicted), he regarded even this not as a defect but as a sign of
philosophical meditation (to which he himself was particularly
study. And if Pierre was often struck by Andrew's lack of capacity for
an opinion about everything), but above all at his capacity for work and
his extensive reading (he had read everything, knew everything, and had
Andrew's calm manner of treating everybody, his extraordinary memory,
described as strength of will. Pierre was always astonished at Prince
degree just the very qualities Pierre lacked, and which might be best
model of perfection because Prince Andrew possessed in the highest
"How can he talk like that?" thought Pierre. He considered his friend a

thought of his friend and how much he expected of him in the future.
He did not finish his sentence, but his tone showed how highly he

before you, everything. And you..."
yourself incapable and your life a spoiled life. You have everything
"It seems funny to me," said Pierre, "that you, you should consider

Andrew.
nothing! No, don't marry, my dear fellow; don't marry!" concluded Prince
seems as if there were something in them, but there's nothing, nothing,
you see them in their true colors! When you meet them in society it
Selfish, vain, stupid, trivial in everything--that's what women are when
what those society women are, and women in general! My father is right.
without whom my wife cannot exist, and those women... If you only knew
Andrew, "and at Anna Pavlovna's they listen to me. And that stupid set
nothing. I am very amiable and have a caustic wit," continued Prince
the greatest war there ever was, and I know nothing and am fit for
the enchanted circle I cannot escape from. I am now going to the war,
regret. Drawing rooms, gossip, balls, vanity, and triviality--these are
have of hope and strength merely weighs you down and torments you with
woman and, like a chained convict, you lose all freedom! And all you
but his aim to consider, and he reached it. But tie yourself up with a
worked went step by step toward his goal. He was free, he had nothing
(though Pierre had not mentioned Bonaparte), "but Bonaparte when he
whole story of life. You talk of Bonaparte and his career," said he
"You don't understand why I say this," he continued, "but it is the

impassioned he became in these moments of almost morbid irritation.
was evident that the more lifeless he seemed at ordinary times, the more
of life had seemed extinguished, now flashed with brilliant light. It
was now quivering with nervous excitement; his eyes, in which the fire
uttered French phrases between his teeth. Every muscle of his thin face
had lolled in Anna Pavlovna's easy chairs and with half-closed eyes had
As he said this Prince Andrew was less than ever like that Bolkonski who

mention this, because I like you."
give now to be unmarried! You are the first and only one to whom I
rare women with whom a man's honor is safe; but, O God, what would I not
"My wife," continued Prince Andrew, "is an excellent woman, one of those

in amazement.
the good-natured expression still more apparent, and gazed at his friend
Pierre took off his spectacles, which made his face seem different and

idiot!... But what's the good?..." and he waved his arm.
where you will be ranged side by side with a court lackey and an
step that for you all is ended, all is closed except the drawing room,
expecting anything from yourself in the future, you will feel at every
Yes! Yes! Yes! Don't look at me with such surprise. If you marry
good and noble in you will be lost. It will all be wasted on trifles.
mistake. Marry when you are old and good for nothing--or all that is
plainly as she is, or else you will make a cruel and irrevocable
until you have ceased to love the woman of your choice and have seen her
you can say to yourself that you have done all you are capable of, and
"Never, never marry, my dear fellow! That's my advice: never marry till

and suddenly determines to speak out.
his face, began to talk--as one who has long had something on his mind
with a look of nervous agitation such as Pierre had never before seen on
Halfway through supper Prince Andrew leaned his elbows on the table and,
that imprint of newness found in the households of the newly married.
Everything from the table napkins to the silver, china, and glass bore
They entered the elegant, newly decorated, and luxurious dining room.

"Let us go and have supper," he said with a sigh, going to the door.

with his small hand.
continually glanced at Prince Andrew; Prince Andrew rubbed his forehead
The friends were silent. Neither cared to begin talking. Pierre

CHAPTER VIII




he would have done to a stranger.
"Good night, Lise," said he, rising and courteously kissing her hand as

she went up to her husband and kissed him on the forehead.
"Mon Dieu, mon Dieu!" she muttered, and lifting her dress with one hand

drooping tail.
deprecating expression of a dog when it rapidly but feebly wags its
glanced askance at her husband's face, and her own assumed the timid,
face changed into a winning and piteous look of fear. Her beautiful eyes
Suddenly the angry, squirrel-like expression of the princess' pretty

indicates that patience is exhausted.
"Lise!" said Prince Andrew dryly, raising his voice to the pitch which

restraining her angry tears.
"No, he thinks only of himself," muttered the princess without

pleasure of spending the evening with you."
"No, wait, Pierre! The princess is too kind to wish to deprive me of the

Prince Andrew caught him by the hand.

bye!"
outsider is out of place here... No, don't distress yourself... Good-
myself have experienced... and so... because... No, excuse me! An
"Calm yourself, Princess! It seems so to you because... I assure you I

sight of tears and was ready to cry himself.
all this, rose and approached the princess. He seemed unable to bear the
Pierre, who had been growing more and more agitated as he listened to

"Lise, I beg you to desist," said Prince Andrew still more emphatically.

like that six months ago?"
"You treat me like an invalid or a child. I see it all! Did you behave

regret her words. But she went on hurriedly:
entreaty, a threat, and above all conviction that she would herself
"Lise!" was all Prince Andrew said. But that one word expressed an

pity for me. Why is it?"
to me? What have I done to you? You are going to the war and have no
grimace. "I have long wanted to ask you, Andrew, why you have changed so
princess suddenly, her pretty face all at once distorted by a tearful
"Why should I mind Monsieur Pierre being here?" exclaimed the little

now at her, moved as if about to rise too, but changed his mind.
Pierre looked over his spectacles with naive surprise, now at him and

Prince Andrew rose, shrugged his shoulders, and walked about the room.
The princess said nothing, but suddenly her short downy lip quivered.

had better go."
"Your doctor tells you to go to bed earlier," said Prince Andrew. "You

"No, Andrew, I must say you have changed. Oh, how you have..."

The princess blushed, and raised her arms with a gesture of despair.

slowly, not taking his eyes off his wife.
"I still can't understand what you are afraid of," said Prince Andrew

gist of the matter lay in that.
felt it indecorous to speak of her pregnancy before Pierre, though the
joyful, but an animal, squirrel-like expression. She paused as if she
Her tone was now querulous and her lip drawn up, giving her not a

afraid."
"Alone all the same, without my friends.... And he expects me not to be

"With my father and sister, remember," said Prince Andrew gently.

the country."
his own, goodness only knows why, he leaves me and locks me up alone in
"There, what egotists men all are: all, all egotists! Just for a whim of

"What is it you are afraid of, Lise? I don't understand," said he.

frigid politeness.
Pierre and himself was in the room, and addressed her in a tone of
Her husband looked at her as if surprised to notice that someone besides

back.
"I'm afraid, I'm afraid!" she whispered, and a shudder ran down her
and then you know, Andre..." (she looked significantly at her husband)
remembered that all these delightful associations must be broken off...
the family circle of which Pierre was almost a member. "Today when I
to Hippolyte in the drawing room and which was so plainly ill-suited to
the princess in the same petulantly playful tone in which she had spoken
"Oh, don't speak of his going, don't! I won't hear it spoken of," said

"When are you starting?" he asked.

conversation, gave no reply.
Pierre looked at his friend and, noticing that he did not like the

Annette and I were speaking of how to arrange it. What do you think?"
to the Emperor. You know the Emperor spoke to him most graciously.
"He is so well received everywhere. He might easily become aide-de-camp
asking, 'Is that the famous Prince Andrew?' I did indeed." She laughed.
appreciated by everyone. The other day at the Apraksins' I heard a lady
camp, a most brilliant position. He is so well known, so much
shall judge between us. I always tell him: Here he is Uncle's aide-de-
that we women don't want anything of the kind, don't need it? Now you
don't in the least understand why men can't live without wars. How is it
"Ah, that is just what I tell him!" said she. "I don't understand it; I

The princess started. Evidently Pierre's words touched her to the quick.

intercourse with young women.
none of the embarrassment so commonly shown by young men in their
wants to go to the war," replied Pierre, addressing the princess with
"And I am still arguing with your husband. I can't understand why he

Monsieur Pierre!"
but you have no sense about women. What an argumentative fellow you are,
stupid you men all are not to have married her! Excuse me for saying so,
fussily in the easy chair, "how is it Annette never got married? How
"How is it," she began, as usual in French, settling down briskly and

chair for her.
fresh and elegant as the other. Prince Andrew rose and politely placed a
The princess came in. She had changed her gown for a house dress as
in Anna Pavlovna's drawing room. Pierre removed his feet from the sofa.
shook himself as if waking up, and his face assumed the look it had had
The rustle of a woman's dress was heard in the next room. Prince Andrew

CHAPTER VII




"I am going because the life I am leading here does not suit me!"
"What for? I don't know. I must. Besides that I am going..." He paused.

"Well, why are you going to the war?" asked Pierre.

"Very likely it would be splendid, but it will never come about..."

Prince Andrew smiled ironically.

"And that would be splendid," said Pierre.

he said.
"If no one fought except on his own conviction, there would be no wars,"

the one Prince Andrew gave to this naive question.
but it would in fact have been difficult to give any other answer than
put on the air of one who finds it impossible to reply to such nonsense,
Prince Andrew only shrugged his shoulders at Pierre's childish words. He

not right."
but to help England and Austria against the greatest man in the world is
freedom I could understand it and should be the first to enter the army;
tell you. There is a war now against Napoleon. If it were a war for
"No, I have not; but this is what I have been thinking and wanted to

talk business. Have you been to the Horse Guards?"
"That is all nonsense." Prince Andrew again interrupted him, "let us

met that evening.
"But he must be a Freemason," said he, referring to the abbe whom he had

Pierre rubbed his forehead.
anything. It was about this choice that Prince Andrew was speaking.
been choosing a career for three months, and had not decided on
me all about it, and I will help you in everything." Pierre had already
anything. Here is a letter to Prince Vasili, and here is money. Write to
Petersburg, look round, and choose your profession. I will agree to
father dismissed the abbe and said to the young man, "Now go to
had remained away till he was twenty. When he returned to Moscow his
Pierre at the age of ten had been sent abroad with an abbe as tutor, and

"But you must decide on something! Your father expects it."

"Really, I don't yet know. I don't like either the one or the other."

Pierre sat up on the sofa, with his legs tucked under him.

diplomatist?" asked Prince Andrew after a momentary silence.
last decided on anything? Are you going to be a guardsman or a
"One can't everywhere say all one thinks, mon cher. Well, have you at

conversation.
It was evident that Prince Andrew was not interested in such abstract

know how to express it... not by a balance of political power...."
right light.... In my opinion perpetual peace is possible but--I do not
"That abbe is very interesting but he does not see the thing in the

face to Prince Andrew, smiled, and waved his hand.
Pierre turned his whole body, making the sofa creak. He lifted his eager

Prince Andrew, as he entered the study, rubbing his small white hands.
"What have you done to Mlle Scherer? She will be quite ill now," said

Commentaries), and resting on his elbow, began reading it in the middle.
from the shelf the first book that came to his hand (it was Caesar's
quite at home, and from habit immediately lay down on the sofa, took
Pierre reaching the house first went into Prince Andrew's study like one

know how to deal with them."
saying that the Russian ladies are not equal to the French? One has to
Hippolyte spluttered again, and amid his laughter said, "And you were

gives himself the airs of a monarch."
continued the vicomte. "I pity the poor husband, that little officer who
"Do you know, you are a terrible chap for all your innocent airs,"

burst out laughing.
indeed, quite French," and he kissed the tips of his fingers. Hippolyte
Hippolyte in the carriage, "your little princess is very nice, very nice
"Well, mon cher," said the vicomte, having seated himself beside

whom he had promised to take home.
laughed spasmodically as he stood in the porch waiting for the vicomte
The postilion started, the carriage wheels rattled. Prince Hippolyte

affectionately.
"I am expecting you, Pierre," said the same voice, but gently and

tone to Prince Hippolyte who was blocking his path.
"Allow me, sir," said Prince Andrew in Russian in a cold, disagreeable

pretense of helping, was in everyone's way.
carriage, her husband was adjusting his saber; Prince Hippolyte, under
The princess, picking up her dress, was taking her seat in the dark

with his feet.
"Princesse, au revoir," cried he, stumbling with his tongue as well as

following the princess, whom a footman was helping into the carriage.
reached to his very heels, and, stumbling in it, ran out into the porch
Prince Hippolyte hurriedly put on his cloak, which in the latest fashion

"Are you ready?" he asked his wife, looking past her.

seem.
husband. Prince Andrew's eyes were closed, so weary and sleepy did he
Still smiling, she gracefully moved away, turning and glancing at her

though embracing her.
shawl had been adjusted he kept his arm around her for a long time, as
awkwardness or intentionally (no one could have said which) after the
pushed aside, he began wrapping it round the princess. Either from
smiling joyfully; and snatching the shawl from the footman, whom he even
"Not all, for you will not be there; not all," said Prince Hippolyte

her downy little lip. "All the pretty women in society will be there."
"They say the ball will be very good," replied the princess, drawing up

"-so dull-. It has been a delightful evening, has it not? Delightful!"
"I am very glad I did not go to the ambassador's," said Prince Hippolyte

spoke smilingly and listened with a laugh.
understanding but not wishing to appear to do so. The princess as usual
French sentences which to them were meaningless, with an air of
cloak, waiting for the conversation to finish. They listened to the
Two footmen, the princess' and his own, stood holding a shawl and a

close to her, began to whisper something.
Prince Hippolyte approached the little princess and, bending his face

and she left the hall.
to her and let me know how her father looks at the matter. Au revoir!"--
"I rely on you, my dear," said Anna Pavlovna, also in a low tone. "Write

contemplated between Anatole and the little princess' sister-in-law.
Anna Pavlovna had already managed to speak to Lise about the match she

voice.
taking leave of Anna Pavlovna. "It is settled," she added in a low
"Go in, Annette, or you will catch cold," said the little princess,

princess, and stared fixedly at her through his eyeglass.
come into the hall. Prince Hippolyte stood close to the pretty, pregnant
indifferently to his wife's chatter with Prince Hippolyte who had also
the footman who was helping him on with his cloak, listened
Prince Andrew had gone out into the hall, and, turning his shoulders to

everyone, including Anna Pavlovna, felt this.
opinions, but you see what a capital, good-natured fellow I am." And
saw his smile, which said nothing, unless perhaps, "Opinions are
When she said this, he did not reply and only bowed, but again everybody

change your opinions, my dear Monsieur Pierre."
nodded and said: "I hope to see you again, but I also hope you will
a Christian mildness that expressed forgiveness of his indiscretion,
simple, and modest expression. Anna Pavlovna turned toward him and, with
enter a room and converse in it was, however, redeemed by his kindly,
asked him to restore it. All his absent-mindedness and inability to
three-cornered hat, and held it, pulling at the plume, till the general
minded. When he rose to go, he took up instead of his own, the general's
particularly agreeable before going away. Besides this he was absent-
room and still less how to leave one; that is, how to say something
red hands; he did not know, as the saying is, how to enter a drawing
Pierre was ungainly. Stout, about the average height, broad, with huge

to take their leave.
Having thanked Anna Pavlovna for her charming soiree, the guests began

CHAPTER VI




where.
next balls, about theatricals, and who would meet whom, and when and
conversation broke up into insignificant small talk about the last and
Pierre's unpleasant and unamiable outburst. After the anecdote the
others appreciated Prince Hippolyte's social tact in so agreeably ending
it, or why it had to be told in Russian, still Anna Pavlovna and the
And so the anecdote ended. Though it was unintelligible why he had told

went on, between gasps of laughter: "And the whole world knew...."
her long hair came down...." Here he could contain himself no longer and
"She went. Suddenly there was a great wind. The girl lost her hat and

smile.
persons, among them the elderly lady and Anna Pavlovna, did however
audience, which produced an effect unfavorable to the narrator. Several
Here Prince Hippolyte spluttered and burst out laughing long before his

get up behind the carriage, and come with me while I make some calls.'"
"She said... Oh yes! She said, 'Girl,' to the maid, 'put on a livery,

difficulty.
Here Prince Hippolyte paused, evidently collecting his ideas with

taste. And she had a lady's maid, also big. She said..."
have two footmen behind her carriage, and very big ones. That was her
"There is in Moscow a lady, une dame, and she is very stingy. She must

attention to his story.
Everyone waited, so emphatically and eagerly did he demand their
as a Frenchman would speak after spending about a year in Russia.
lost...." And Prince Hippolyte began to tell his story in such Russian
Excuse me, Vicomte--I must tell it in Russian or the point will be
"I was told a charming Moscow story today and must treat you to it.

and asking them all to be seated began:
Suddenly Prince Hippolyte started up making signs to everyone to attend,

go.
Pierre's remarks, rose and made a sign to his wife that it was time to
Prince Andrew, who had evidently wished to tone down the awkwardness of

which it is difficult to justify."
gave his hand to the plague-stricken; but... but there are other acts
great on the bridge of Arcola, and in the hospital at Jaffa where he
"One must admit," continued Prince Andrew, "that Napoleon as a man was

reinforcement.
"Yes, yes, of course!" Pierre chimed in, pleased at the arrival of this

seems to me."
his acts as a private person, as a general, and as an emperor. So it
"Besides, in the actions of a statesman one has to distinguish between
"How do you expect him to answer you all at once?" said Prince Andrew.

silent.
young Jacobin was not so terrible as his words suggested. All were
The vicomte who was meeting him for the first time saw clearly that this

forgiveness.
-a childlike, kindly, even rather silly look, which seemed to ask
grave, even rather gloomy, look was instantaneously replaced by another-
smile was unlike the half-smile of other people. When he smiled, his
Pierre, not knowing whom to answer, looked at them all and smiled. His

"He's a low fellow, say what you will," remarked Prince Hippolyte.

little princess, shrugging her shoulders.
"And the prisoners he killed in Africa? That was horrible!" said the

all like the conduct of a great man!"
18th Brumaire; was not that an imposture? It was a swindle, and not at
"I should like," said the vicomte, "to ask how monsieur explains the

and untried?"
of a great man executing a duc--or even an ordinary man who--is innocent
"But, my dear Monsieur Pierre," said she, "how do you explain the fact

a vigorous attack on the orator.
impossible to stop him, she rallied her forces and joined the vicomte in
exasperated the vicomte, and had convinced herself that it was
horror-struck. But when she saw that Pierre's sacrilegious words had not
Pierre's outburst Anna Pavlovna, despite her social experience, was
vicomte and from the vicomte to their hostess. In the first moment of
Prince Andrew kept looking with an amused smile from Pierre to the

wanted liberty, but Buonaparte has destroyed it."
Have people since the Revolution become happier? On the contrary. We
liberty and equality? Even our Saviour preached liberty and equality.
"high-sounding words which have long been discredited. Who does not love
deciding seriously to prove to this youth how foolish his words were,
"Liberty and equality," said the vicomte contemptuously, as if at last

in full force."
and equality of citizenship, and all these ideas Napoleon has retained
What is important are the rights of man, emancipation from prejudices,
"Those were extremes, no doubt, but they are not what is most important.

ironical voice.
"Yes: ideas of robbery, murder, and regicide," again interjected an

"I am not speaking of regicide, I am speaking about ideas."

"Rousseau's Contrat Social," said the vicomte with a tolerant smile.

won't you come to this other table?" repeated Anna Pavlovna.
"What? Revolution and regicide a grand thing?... Well, after that... But

wish to express all that was in his mind.
this desperate and provocative proposition his extreme youth and his
Revolution was a grand thing!" continued Monsieur Pierre, betraying by
them of the Bourbons and because they saw that he was a great man. The
"He could not do that. The people only gave him power that he might rid

a great man," remarked the vicomte.
murder he had restored it to the rightful king, I should have called him
"Yes, if having obtained power, without availing himself of it to commit

of the press--and only for that reason did he obtain power."
that was good in it--equality of citizenship and freedom of speech and
he rose superior to the Revolution, suppressed its abuses, preserved all
"No," cried he, becoming more and more eager, "Napoleon is great because

But Pierre continued his speech without heeding her.

"Won't you come over to the other table?" suggested Anna Pavlovna.

he could not stop short for the sake of one man's life."
understood the Revolution and quelled it, and so for the general good,
the Revolution leaving the people to anarchy, and Napoleon alone
"I say so," he continued desperately, "because the Bourbons fled from

audience over his spectacles and continued.
The vicomte merely shrugged his shoulders. Pierre looked solemnly at his

with the palm of his hand.
"Capital!" said Prince Hippolyte in English, and began slapping his knee

"Oh! Oh!" exclaimed several voices.

work nearer to her.
greatness of soul?" said the little princess, smiling and drawing her
"What, Monsieur Pierre... Do you consider that assassination shows

"Dieu! Mon Dieu!" muttered Anna Pavlovna in a terrified whisper.

that deed."
of soul by not fearing to take on himself the whole responsibility of
political necessity, and it seems to me that Napoleon showed greatness
"The execution of the Duc d'Enghien," declared Monsieur Pierre, "was a

was unable to stop him.
though Anna Pavlovna felt sure he would say something inappropriate, she
of the vicomte's epigram, Pierre again broke into the conversation, and
Before Anna Pavlovna and the others had time to smile their appreciation

hero less on earth."
after the murder of the duc there was one martyr more in heaven and one
people," he went on, turning to Anna Pavlovna, "he ever was a hero,
even the most partial ceased to regard him as a hero. If to some
"Not in the least," replied the vicomte. "After the murder of the duc

he was justified in saying so."
"'I opened my antechambers and they crowded in.' I do not know how far
Andrew continued after a short silence, again quoting Napoleon's words.
"'I showed them the path to glory, but they did not follow it,'" Prince

remarks at him, though without looking at him.
It was evident that he did not like the vicomte and was aiming his

"Bonaparte has said so," remarked Prince Andrew with a sarcastic smile.

state of French public opinion."
looking at Pierre. "At the present time it is difficult to know the real
"It is the Buonapartists who say that," replied the vicomte without

Bonaparte's side."
conversation, "almost all the aristocracy has already gone over to
"From what I have heard," said Pierre, blushing and breaking into the

be difficult to return to the old regime."
rightly supposes that matters have already gone too far. I think it will
"That is doubtful," said Prince Andrew. "Monsieur le Vicomte quite

emigrant.
rightful king," she concluded, trying to be amiable to the royalist
the whole nation will certainly throw itself into the arms of its
own form of government; and I believe that once free from the usurper,
that he will leave it to the French people themselves to choose their
accompanied any reference of hers to the Imperial family, "has declared
"The Emperor Alexander," said she, with the melancholy which always

who had him under observation, interrupted:
make a remark, for the conversation interested him, but Anna Pavlovna,
He shrugged his shoulders and spread out his hands. Pierre wished to

good French society--will have been forever destroyed, and then..."
By intrigues, violence, exile, and executions, French society--I mean
follows the current of his own thoughts, "things will have gone too far.
is better acquainted than anyone else, does not listen to others but
vicomte continued, with the air of a man who, in a matter with which he
"If Buonaparte remains on the throne of France a year longer," the

The princess listened, smiling.

"Baton de gueules, engrele de gueules d'azur--maison Conde," said he.

as if she had asked him to do it.
coat of arms on the table. He explained this to her with as much gravity
little princess, and having asked for a needle began tracing the Conde
through his lorgnette, suddenly turned completely round toward the
Prince Hippolyte, who had been gazing at the vicomte for some time

And sighing disdainfully, he again changed his position.

to compliment the usurper."
of the Bourbon cause. The sovereigns! Why, they are sending ambassadors
animated. "And believe me, they are reaping the reward of their betrayal
for the Queen, or for Madame Elizabeth? Nothing!" and he became more
hopeless: "The sovereigns, madame... What have they done for Louis XVII,
"The sovereigns? I do not speak of Russia," said the vicomte, polite but

endure this man who is a menace to everything."
over," Anna Pavlovna continued. "The sovereigns will not be able to
"I hope this will prove the last drop that will make the glass run

* God has given it to me, let him who touches it beware!


mi l'ha dato. Guai a chi la tocchi!'"
when he said that," he remarked, repeating the words in Italian: "'Dio
"'Dieu me la donne, gare a qui la touche!' * They say he was very fine

smile.
Prince Andrew looked Anna Pavlovna straight in the face with a sarcastic

the whole world had gone crazy."
nations? Adorable! It is enough to make one's head whirl! It is as if
Buonaparte sitting on a throne and granting the petitions of the
laying their petitions before Monsieur Buonaparte, and Monsieur
asked Anna Pavlovna, "and of the comedy of the people of Genoa and Lucca
"And what do you think of this latest comedy, the coronation at Milan?"

CHAPTER V




accomplished.
listen, while waiting till it would be time to leave. Her task was
group where the vicomte was still talking, and again pretended to
resumed its former cold, artificial expression. She returned to the
the old feminine arts. But as soon as the prince had gone her face
Apparently she had forgotten her age and by force of habit employed all

naturally to her, but was now very ill-suited to her careworn face.
with the smile of a coquettish girl, which at one time probably came
"Do promise, do promise, Vasili!" cried Anna Mikhaylovna as he went,

"Certainly; but about Kutuzov, I don't promise."

"Then tomorrow you will speak to the Emperor?"

"Well, au revoir! Good-bye! You hear her?"

shall be late."
"Papa," said his beautiful daughter in the same tone as before, "we

"No, but do promise! I won't let you go! My dear benefactor..."

Moscow ladies have conspired to give him all their sons as adjutants."
his appointment as Commander in Chief. He told me himself that all the
"No, I won't promise that. You don't know how Kutuzov is pestered since

Prince Vasili smiled.

then..."
recommend Boris to him as adjutant! Then I shall be at rest, and
faltered. "You are on good terms with Michael Ilarionovich Kutuzov...
"Wait--just a word! When he has been transferred to the Guards..." she

kindness!" He turned to go.
"My dear benefactor! This is what I expected from you--I knew your

Here is my hand on it. Are you satisfied?"
I will do the impossible--your son shall be transferred to the Guards.
but to prove my devotion to you and how I respect your father's memory,
weariness of tone, "it is almost impossible for me to do what you ask;
"My dear Anna Mikhaylovna," said he with his usual familiarity and

This last consideration moved him.
insisting day after day and hour after hour, and even to make scenes.
until they have gained their end, and are prepared if necessary to go on
mostly mothers--who, having once made up their minds, will not rest
Moreover, he could see by her manners that she was one of those women--
he had been indebted to her father for the first steps in his career.
like qualms of conscience. She had reminded him of what was quite true;
Princess Drubetskaya's case he felt, after her second appeal, something
to ask for himself, he became chary of using his influence. But in
if he asked on behalf of all who begged of him, he would soon be unable
if it is to last. Prince Vasili knew this, and having once realized that
Influence in society, however, is a capital which has to be economized

waiting by the door.
head and looking over her classically molded shoulder as she stood
"Papa, we shall be late," said Princess Helene, turning her beautiful

trying to smile though tears were in her eyes.
and he has refused. Be the kindhearted man you always were," she said,
added hurriedly. "No, don't be angry, but promise! I have asked Golitsyn
this for my son--and I shall always regard you as a benefactor," she
father's friendship for you; but now I entreat you for God's sake to do
anything and I never will again, nor have I ever reminded you of my
"Listen to me, Prince," said she. "I have never yet asked you for

smiled again and clutched Prince Vasili's arm more tightly.
look clouded her once handsome face, but only for a moment; then she
vicomte's story. Prince Vasili's words frightened her, an embittered
invitation to Anna Pavlovna's reception and had sat listening to the
was, in fact, solely to meet Prince Vasili that she had obtained an
Petersburg to procure an appointment in the Guards for her only son. It
society had lost her former influential connections. She had now come to
best families in Russia, but she was poor, and having long been out of
The elderly lady was a Princess Drubetskaya, belonging to one of the

best way."
you to appeal to Rumyantsev through Prince Golitsyn. That would be the
Vasili, "but it is difficult for me to ask the Emperor. I should advise
"Believe me, Princess, I am ready to do all I can," answered Prince

be transferred to the Guards at once?" said she.
"What would it cost you to say a word to the Emperor, and then he would

away.
ingratiating and appealing smile, and took his hand that he might not go
elderly lady, even betraying some impatience, she gave him an
Although Prince Vasili listened reluctantly and not very politely to the

may take back to my poor boy."
anteroom. "I can't remain any longer in Petersburg. Tell me what news I
"How about my son Boris, Prince?" said she, hurrying after him into the

fear.
left her kindly and tear-worn face and it now expressed only anxiety and
in the anteroom. All the affectation of interest she had assumed had
been sitting with the old aunt rose hurriedly and overtook Prince Vasili
father to be a connection of Prince Vasili's. The elderly lady who had
Anna Pavlovna smiled and promised to take Pierre in hand. She knew his

necessary for a young man as the society of clever women."
this is the first time I have seen him in society. Nothing is so
"Educate this bear for me! He has been staying with me a whole month and
In passing Prince Vasili seized Pierre's hand and said to Anna Pavlovna:

"Very," said Pierre.

"Very lovely," said Prince Andrew.

almost frightened, eyes as she passed him.
radiantly on her beautiful face. Pierre gazed at her with rapturous,
holding up the folds of her dress, and the smile shone still more
His daughter, Princess Helene, passed between the chairs, lightly

enchanting party," said he, turning to Anna Pavlovna.
and obliges me to interrupt you. I am very sorry to leave your
"This unfortunate fete at the ambassador's deprives me of a pleasure,
holding him down by the sleeve in a friendly way to prevent his rising.
"You must excuse me, dear Vicomte," said Prince Vasili to the Frenchman,

got up to go and the two young men rose to let them pass.
say something more, but at that moment Prince Vasili and his daughter
hand to show that there was no need to ask the question. He wished to
"No, impossible!" said Prince Andrew, laughing and pressing Pierre's

who was continuing his story.
you. May I?" he added in a low voice so as not to disturb the vicomte
"I knew you would be here," replied Pierre. "I will come to supper with

"There now!... So you, too, are in the great world?" said he to Pierre.

unexpectedly kind and pleasant smile.
touching his arm, but when he saw Pierre's beaming face he gave him an
Prince Andrew frowned again, expressing his annoyance with whoever was
affectionate eyes, now came up and took his arm. Before he looked round
moment Prince Andrew entered the room had watched him with glad,
Prince Andrew screwed up his eyes and turned away. Pierre, who from the

such a tale about Mademoiselle George and Buonaparte!"
manner in which she spoke to other men, "the vicomte has been telling us
"Andre," said his wife, addressing her husband in the same coquettish

"Are you not ashamed to deprive us of your charming wife?"

"She will go to the country."

"And Lise, your wife?"

to take me as an aide-de-camp...."
last syllable of the general's name like a Frenchman, "has been pleased
"General Kutuzov," said Bolkonski, speaking French and stressing the

"You are off to the war, Prince?" said Anna Pavlovna.

hand, and screwing up his eyes scanned the whole company.
with a grimace that distorted his handsome face, kissed Anna Pavlovna's
bore him so much as that of his pretty wife. He turned away from her
them. And among all these faces that he found so tedious, none seemed to
found them to be so tiresome that it wearied him to look at or listen to
evident that he not only knew everyone in the drawing room, but had
offered a most striking contrast to his quiet, little wife. It was
him, from his weary, bored expression to his quiet, measured step,
man, of medium height, with firm, clearcut features. Everything about
Bolkonski, the little princess' husband. He was a very handsome young
Just then another visitor entered the drawing room: Prince Andrew

CHAPTER IV




larger circle.
conveniently to keep them under observation, brought them into the
Not letting the abbe and Pierre escape, Anna Pavlovna, the more

the climate," said he.
the honor of being received, that I have not yet had time to think of
society, more especially of the feminine society, in which I have had
"I am so enchanted by the brilliancy of the wit and culture of the

expression, evidently habitual to him when conversing with women.
instantly changed and assumed an offensively affected, sugary
asked the Italian how he stood Russian climate. The Italian's face
At that moment Anna Pavlovna came up and, looking severely at Pierre,

"But how are you to get that balance?" Pierre was beginning.

world!"
maintenance of the balance of power of Europe, and it would save the
disinterestedly at the head of an alliance having for its object the
nation like Russia--barbaric as she is said to be--to place herself
people," the abbe was saying. "It is only necessary for one powerful
"The means are... the balance of power in Europe and the rights of the

Pavlovna disapproved.
talking and listening too eagerly and too naturally, which was why Anna
man's simple-minded eagerness, was explaining his pet theory. Both were
the balance of power, and the latter, evidently interested by the young
rescue. Pierre had managed to start a conversation with the abbe about
talking too loudly and vehemently with the abbe, so she hurried to the
watchful eye on the young man who so alarmed her, noticed that he was
prepared to continue, but just then Anna Pavlovna, who had kept a
The vicomte appreciated this silent praise and smiling gratefully

prevented her from going on with it.
work as if to testify that the interest and fascination of the story
"Charming!" whispered the little princess, sticking the needle into her

princess.
"Charming!" said Anna Pavlovna with an inquiring glance at the little

agitated.
the rivals suddenly recognized one another; and the ladies looked
The story was very pretty and interesting, especially at the point where

magnanimity Bonaparte subsequently repaid by death.
and was thus at the duc's mercy. The latter spared him, and this
happened to fall into one of the fainting fits to which he was subject,
enjoyed the famous actress' favors, and that in his presence Napoleon
Mademoiselle George; that at her house he came upon Bonaparte, who also
to the effect that the Duc d'Enghien had gone secretly to Paris to visit
The vicomte told his tale very neatly. It was an anecdote, then current,

effrayee, as he called it, shoes, and silk stockings.
dark-green dress coat, knee breeches of the color of cuisse de nymphe
whether what he said was very witty or very stupid. He was dressed in a
He spoke with such self-confidence that his hearers could not be sure

uttered them.
showed that he only understood the meaning of his words after he had
"Because I hate ghost stories," said Prince Hippolyte in a tone which

shoulders.
"Why no, my dear fellow," said the astonished narrator, shrugging his

instrument he could not begin to speak.
princess and hastily adjusting his lorgnette, as if without this
"It's not going to be a ghost story?" said he, sitting down beside the

legs always fell into unnatural positions.
all seemed puckered into a vacant, wearied grimace, and his arms and
confidence, while his body was thin and weak. His eyes, nose, and mouth
dulled by imbecility and a constant expression of sullen self-
wonderful classic beauty of her figure, his face on the contrary was
satisfied, youthful, and constant smile of animation, and by the
sister's, but while in her case everything was lit up by a joyous, self-
resemblance he was exceedingly ugly. His features were like his
his beautiful sister, but yet more by the fact that in spite of this
Le charmant Hippolyte was surprising by his extraordinary resemblance to

moving a chair close to hers seated himself beside her.
Prince Hippolyte, having brought the workbag, joined the circle and

took up her work.
"Now I am all right," she said, and asking the vicomte to begin, she

seat.
merrily to everyone at once, sat down and gaily arranged herself in her
There was a general movement as the princess, smiling and talking

of?" she went on, turning to Prince Hippolyte. "Fetch me my workbag."
"Wait a moment, I'll get my work.... Now then, what are you thinking

The little princess had also left the tea table and followed Helene.

into her radiant smile.
the expression she saw on the maid of honor's face, and again relapsed
produced an effect she glanced at Anna Pavlovna, at once adopted just
to time she smoothed the folds of her dress, and whenever the story
beautiful bosom, on which she readjusted a diamond necklace. From time
altered in shape by its pressure on the table, now at her still more
being told she sat upright, glancing now at her beautiful round arm,
a reply unnecessary. She smilingly waited. All the time the story was
The princess rested her bare round arm on a little table and considered

inclining his head.
"Madame, I doubt my ability before such an audience," said he, smilingly

unchanging smile.
when she took her seat opposite and beamed upon him also with her
shoulders and dropped his eyes as if startled by something extraordinary
"How lovely!" said everyone who saw her; and the vicomte lifted his

but to be unable, to diminish its effect.
her unquestionable and all too victorious beauty. She seemed to wish,
show any trace of coquetry, but on the contrary she even appeared shy of
toward Anna Pavlovna. Helene was so lovely that not only did she not
and she seemed to bring the glamour of a ballroom with her as she moved
and bosom--which in the fashion of those days were very much exposed--
privilege of admiring her beautiful figure and shapely shoulders, back,
at any of them but smiling on all, as if graciously allowing each the
diamonds, she passed between the men who made way for her, not looking
ivy, with a gleam of white shoulders, glossy hair, and sparkling
woman. With a slight rustle of her white dress trimmed with moss and
she had first entered the room--the smile of a perfectly beautiful
The princess smiled. She rose with the same unchanging smile with which

group.
young princess who was sitting some way off, the center of another
"Come over here, Helene, dear," said Anna Pavlovna to the beautiful

The vicomte wished to begin his story and gave a subtle smile.

dish.
advantageous style, like a well-garnished joint of roast beef on a hot
the vicomte was served up to the company in the choicest and most
"How evidently he belongs to the best society," said she to a third; and
the guests. "The vicomte is a wonderful raconteur," said she to another.
"The vicomte knew the duc personally," whispered Anna Pavlovna to one of

listen to his tale.
comply. Anna Pavlovna arranged a group round him, inviting everyone to
The vicomte bowed and smiled courteously in token of his willingness to

that sentence: "Contez nous cela, Vicomte."
pleasant feeling that there was something a la Louis XV in the sound of
"Ah, yes! Do tell us all about it, Vicomte," said Anna Pavlovna, with a

for Buonaparte's hatred of him.
perished by his own magnanimity, and that there were particular reasons
murder of the Duc d'Enghien. The vicomte said that the Duc d'Enghien had
morsels. The group about Mortemart immediately began discussing the
guests, first the vicomte and then the abbe, as peculiarly choice
kitchen would have cared to eat, so Anna Pavlovna served up to her
choice delicacy a piece of meat that no one who had seen it in the
treat to her guests. As a clever maitre d'hotel serves up as a specially
which he found himself. Anna Pavlovna was obviously serving him up as a
politeness modestly placed himself at the disposal of the circle in
manners, who evidently considered himself a celebrity but out of
The vicomte was a nice-looking young man with soft features and polished

group was gathered round Mortemart and Anna Pavlovna.
very pretty and rosy, though rather too plump for her age. The third
Helene, Prince Vasili's daughter, and the little Princess Bolkonskaya,
abbe. Another, of young people, was grouped round the beautiful Princess
settled into three groups. One, chiefly masculine, had formed round the
was rather out of place in this brilliant society, the whole company had
beside whom sat only one elderly lady, who with her thin careworn face
steadily and ceaselessly on all sides. With the exception of the aunt,
Anna Pavlovna's reception was in full swing. The spindles hummed

CHAPTER III




to express his own views, as young people are fond of doing.
conversation seemed interesting and he stood waiting for an opportunity
to hear something very profound. At last he came up to Morio. Here the
refined expression on the faces of those present he was always expecting
clever conversation that was to be heard. Seeing the self-confident and
in a toyshop, did not know which way to look, afraid of missing any
intellectual lights of Petersburg were gathered there and, like a child
was the first he had attended in Russia. He knew that all the
Pierre had been educated abroad, and this reception at Anna Pavlovna's

again when he passed to another group whose center was the abbe.
the group round Mortemart to listen to what was being said there, and
Pierre was evident. She kept an anxious watch on him when he approached
proper, and regular motion. But amid these cares her anxiety about
word or slight rearrangement kept the conversational machine in steady,
drawing room, approaching now a silent, now a too-noisy group, and by a
machine or set it in proper motion, so Anna Pavlovna moved about her
creaks or makes more noise than it should, and hastens to check the
round and notices here a spindle that has stopped or there one that
foreman of a spinning mill, when he has set the hands to work, goes
to help at any point where the conversation might happen to flag. As the
resumed her duties as hostess and continued to listen and watch, ready
And having got rid of this young man who did not know how to behave, she

"We will talk of it later," said Anna Pavlovna with a smile.

he began explaining his reasons for thinking the abbe's plan chimerical.
wished to get away. With his head bent, and his big feet spread apart,
finished speaking to him, and now he continued to speak to another who
reverse act of impoliteness. First he had left a lady before she had
away to attend to her duties as hostess. But Pierre now committed a
"You think so?" rejoined Anna Pavlovna in order to say something and get

interesting but hardly feasible."
"Yes, I have heard of his scheme for perpetual peace, and it is very

Morio? He is a most interesting man."
Pavlovna in dismay detained him with the words: "Do you know the Abbe
aunt without waiting to hear her speech about Her Majesty's health. Anna
Anna Pavlovna's alarm was justified, for Pierre turned away from the

princess with a pleased smile, as to an intimate acquaintance.
if in search of something. On his way to the aunt he bowed to the little
Pierre murmured something unintelligible, and continued to look round as

as she conducted him to her.
invalid," said Anna Pavlovna, exchanging an alarmed glance with her aunt
"It is very good of you, Monsieur Pierre, to come and visit a poor

distinguished him from everyone else in that drawing room.
clever though shy, but observant and natural, expression which
the other men in the room, her anxiety could only have reference to the
when she saw Pierre enter. Though he was certainly rather bigger than
of something too large and unsuited to the place, came over her face
this lowest-grade greeting, a look of anxiety and fear, as at the sight
accorded to the lowest hierarchy in her drawing room. But in spite of
first appearance in society. Anna Pavlovna greeted him with the nod she
just returned from abroad where he had been educated, and this was his
had not yet entered either the military or civil service, as he had only
grandee of Catherine's time who now lay dying in Moscow. The young man
young man was an illegitimate son of Count Bezukhov, a well-known
at that time, a very high ruffle, and a brown dress coat. This stout
close-cropped hair, spectacles, the light-colored breeches fashionable
One of the next arrivals was a stout, heavily built young man with

Anna Pavlovna.
"What a delightful woman this little princess is!" said Prince Vasili to

turned to speak to his daughter, the beautiful Helene.
added, addressing Prince Vasili, and without waiting for an answer she
to get himself killed. Tell me what this wretched war is for?" she
French, turning to a general, "my husband is deserting me? He is going
"You know," said the princess in the same tone of voice and still in

replied Anna Pavlovna.
"Soyez tranquille, Lise, you will always be prettier than anyone else,"

girdled with a broad ribbon just below the breast.
out her arms to show her short-waisted, lace-trimmed, dainty gray dress,
small reception, and just see how badly I am dressed." And she spread
added, turning to her hostess. "You wrote that it was to be quite a
"Mind, Annette, I hope you have not played a wicked trick on me," she
said she in French, displaying her bag and addressing all present.
pleasure to herself and to all around her. "I have brought my work,"
down on a sofa near the silver samovar, as if all she was doing was a
steps, her workbag on her arm, and gaily spreading out her dress sat
The little princess went round the table with quick, short, swaying

specially amiable mood that day.
and the constant gleam of her white teeth, thought that they were in a
and health. All who talked to her, and at each word saw her bright smile
little while, felt as if they too were becoming, like her, full of life
who looked at her, after being in her company and talking to her a
carrying her burden so lightly. Old men and dull dispirited young ones
young woman, so soon to become a mother, so full of life and health, and
peculiar form of beauty. Everyone brightened at the sight of this pretty
upper lip and her half-open mouth--seemed to be her own special and
with a thoroughly attractive woman, her defect--the shortness of her
occasionally drew it down to meet the lower lip. As is always the case
lifted all the more sweetly, and was especially charming when she
dark down was just perceptible, was too short for her teeth, but it
embroidered velvet bag. Her pretty little upper lip, on which a delicate
The young Princess Bolkonskaya had brought some work in a gold-

to her the whole evening.
sense of relief at having performed a vexatious duty and did not return
politeness prevented his showing impatience, left the old woman with a
Majesty, "who, thank God, was better today." And each visitor, though
the same words, about their health and her own, and the health of Her
solemn interest and silent approval. The aunt spoke to each of them in
cared about; Anna Pavlovna observed these greetings with mournful and
one of them knew, not one of them wanted to know, and not one of them
Each visitor performed the ceremony of greeting this old aunt whom not

mentioned each one's name and then left them.
slowly turning her eyes from the visitor to her aunt, Anna Pavlovna
sailing in from another room as soon as the guests began to arrive; and
little old lady, wearing large bows of ribbon in her cap, who had come
or "You do not know my aunt?" and very gravely conducted him or her to a
To each new arrival Anna Pavlovna said, "You have not yet seen my aunt,"

* The most fascinating woman in Petersburg.


and many others had also come.
Hippolyte, had come with Mortemart, whom he introduced. The Abbe Morio
large gatherings, but only to small receptions. Prince Vasili's son,
married during the previous winter, and being pregnant did not go to any
femme la plus seduisante de Petersbourg, * was also there. She had been
as maid of honor. The youthful little Princess Bolkonskaya, known as la
to the ambassador's entertainment; she wore a ball dress and her badge
Prince Vasili's daughter, the beautiful Helene, came to take her father
and character but alike in the social circle to which they belonged.
Petersburg society was assembled there: people differing widely in age
Anna Pavlovna's drawing room was gradually filling. The highest

CHAPTER II




apprenticeship as old maid."
arranged. It shall be on your family's behalf that I'll start my
Bolkonski's wife, this very evening, and perhaps the thing can be
"Attendez," said Anna Pavlovna, reflecting, "I'll speak to Lise, young

he lay back in his armchair, looking in another direction.
maid of honor's hand to his lips, kissed it, and swung it to and fro as
And with the familiarity and easy grace peculiar to him, he raised the

family and that's all I want."
village elder of mine writes in his reports. She is rich and of good
me and I shall always be your most devoted slave-slafe with an f, as a
hand and for some reason drawing it downwards. "Arrange that affair for
"Listen, dear Annette," said the prince, suddenly taking Anna Pavlovna's

aide-de-camp of Kutuzov's and will be here tonight."
brother; I think you know him, he married Lise Meinen lately. He is an
but eccentric, and a bore. The poor girl is very unhappy. She has a
late Emperor, and was nicknamed 'the King of Prussia.' He is very clever
well-known Prince Bolkonski who had to retire from the army under the
"Her father is very rich and stingy. He lives in the country. He is the

fathers have to put up with.... Is this princess of yours rich?"
years, if he goes on like this?" Presently he added: "That's what we
rubles a year? And," he went on after a pause, "what will it be in five
current of his thoughts, "that Anatole is costing me forty thousand
"Do you know," he said at last, evidently unable to check the sad

the head that he was considering this information.
perception befitting a man of the world, he indicated by a movement of
Prince Vasili did not reply, though, with the quickness of memory and

Bolkonskaya."
very unhappy with her father. She is a relation of yours, Princess Mary
don't feel that weakness in myself as yet, I know a little person who is
asked. "They say old maids have a mania for matchmaking, and though I
"Have you never thought of marrying your prodigal son Anatole?" she

gesture. Anna Pavlovna meditated.
He said no more, but expressed his resignation to cruel fate by a

is how I explain it to myself. It can't be helped!"
children are the bane of my life. It is the cross I have to bear. That
"I am your faithful slave and to you alone I can confess that my

looking up pensively.
there would be nothing I could reproach you with," said Anna Pavlovna,
"And why are children born to such men as you? If you were not a father

very clearly revealed something unexpectedly coarse and unpleasant.
natural and animated than usual, so that the wrinkles round his mouth
is the only difference between them." He said this smiling in a way more
Hippolyte is at least a quiet fool, but Anatole is an active one. That
father could for their education, and they have both turned out fools.
"What would you have me do?" he said at last. "You know I did all a

awaiting a reply. He frowned.
The prince answered nothing, but she looked at him significantly,

and you were pitied...."
assumed its melancholy expression), "he was mentioned at Her Majesty's
dissatisfied with your younger son? Between ourselves" (and her face
"Don't joke; I mean to have a serious talk with you. Do you know I am

bump of paternity."
"I can't help it," said the prince. "Lavater would have said I lack the

And she smiled her ecstatic smile.

don't deserve to have them."
children. And really you appreciate them less than anyone, and so you
admitting of no rejoinder and raising her eyebrows. "Two such charming
speak of Anatole, your youngest. I don't like him," she added in a tone
distributed. Why has fate given you two such splendid children? I don't
conversation--"I often think how unfairly sometimes the joys of life are
social topics were ended and the time had come for intimate
the prince and smiling amiably at him as if to show that political and
"I often think," she continued after a short pause, drawing nearer to

The prince bowed to signify his respect and gratitude.

beautiful."
everyone has been enraptured by her? They say she is amazingly
"Now about your family. Do you know that since your daughter came out

said:
recommended to the Empress) and at the same time to console him, so she
both to rebuke him (for daring to speak as he had done of a man
courtierlike quickness and tact habitual to her, Anna Pavlovna wished
The prince was silent and looked indifferent. But, with the womanly and

beaucoup d'estime, and again her face clouded over with sadness.
patroness. She added that Her Majesty had deigned to show Baron Funke
sadness, and this occurred every time she mentioned her illustrious
expression of profound and sincere devotion and respect mingled with
As she named the Empress, Anna Pavlovna's face suddenly assumed an

was all she said, in a dry and mournful tone.
"Baron Funke has been recommended to the Dowager Empress by her sister,"

pleased with.
anyone else had a right to criticize what the Empress desired or was
Anna Pavlovna almost closed her eyes to indicate that neither she nor

baron.
trying through the Dowager Empress Marya Fedorovna to secure it for the
Prince Vasili wished to obtain this post for his son, but others were

creature."
appointed first secretary at Vienna? The baron by all accounts is a poor
visit, "is it true that the Dowager Empress wants Baron Funke to be
though the question he was about to ask was the chief motive of his
added with studied carelessness as if it had only just occurred to him,
"I shall be delighted to meet them," said the prince. "But tell me," he

received by the Emperor. Had you heard?"
also the Abbe Morio. Do you know that profound thinker? He has been
French families. He is one of the genuine emigres, the good ones. And
connected with the Montmorencys through the Rohans, one of the best
two very interesting men tonight, le Vicomte de Mortemart, who is
"In a moment. A propos," she added, becoming calm again, "I am expecting

cup of tea?"
Prussia's consent by assault. You are so eloquent. Will you give me a
instead of our dear Wintzingerode you would have captured the King of
"I think," said the prince with a smile, "that if you had been sent

She suddenly paused, smiling at her own impetuosity.

destiny of our adored monarch. He will save Europe!"
neutrality is just a trap. I have faith only in God and the lofty
that Hardenburg says, or Haugwitz either. This famous Prussian
that all Europe is powerless before him.... And I don't believe a word
perform! Prussia has always declared that Buonaparte is invincible, and
promised? Nothing! And what little they have promised they will not
himself, but only desires the good of mankind. And what have they
understand the self-abnegation of our Emperor who wants nothing for
Novosiltsev get? None. The English have not understood and cannot
still seeks, some secret motive in our actions. What answer did
of soul. She has refused to evacuate Malta. She wanted to find, and
spirit will not and cannot understand the Emperor Alexander's loftiness
one.... Whom, I ask you, can we rely on?... England with her commercial
this murderer and villain! We alone must avenge the blood of the just
revolution, which has become more terrible than ever in the person of
not forsake him. He will fulfill his vocation and crush the hydra of
the noblest role on earth, and he is so virtuous and noble that God will
thing I have faith in! Our good and wonderful sovereign has to perform
recognizes his high vocation and will be true to it. That is the one
betraying us! Russia alone must save Europe. Our gracious sovereign
but Austria never has wished, and does not wish, for war. She is
"Oh, don't speak to me of Austria. Perhaps I don't understand things,

out:
In the midst of a conversation on political matters Anna Pavlovna burst

correct.
which she neither wished, nor could, nor considered it necessary, to
as in a spoiled child, a continual consciousness of her charming defect,
did not suit her faded features, always played round her lips expressed,
expectations of those who knew her. The subdued smile which, though it
like it, she became enthusiastic in order not to disappoint the
become her social vocation and, sometimes even when she did not feel
overflowed with animation and impulsiveness. To be an enthusiast had
part. Anna Pavlovna Scherer on the contrary, despite her forty years,
Prince Vasili always spoke languidly, like an actor repeating a stale

burnt his boats, and I believe that we are ready to burn ours."
tone. "What has been decided? They have decided that Buonaparte has
"What can one say about it?" replied the prince in a cold, listless

dispatch? You know everything."
"Don't tease! Well, and what has been decided about Novosiltsev's

said things he did not even wish to be believed.
put off," said the prince, who, like a wound-up clock, by force of habit
"If they had known that you wished it, the entertainment would have been

festivities and fireworks are becoming wearisome."
"I thought today's fete had been canceled. I confess all these

me to take me there."
put in an appearance there," said the prince. "My daughter is coming for
"And the fete at the English ambassador's? Today is Wednesday. I must

whole evening, I hope?"
these if one has any feeling?" said Anna Pavlovna. "You are staying the
"Can one be well while suffering morally? Can one be calm in times like

discerned.
affected sympathy of which indifference and even irony could be
at rest," said he without altering his tone, beneath the politeness and
"First of all, dear friend, tell me how you are. Set your friend's mind

and complacently seated himself on the sofa.
kissed her hand, presenting to her his bald, scented, and shining head,
who had grown old in society and at court. He went up to Anna Pavlovna,
with the gentle, patronizing intonation natural to a man of importance
refined French in which our grandfathers not only spoke but thought, and
his breast and a serene expression on his flat face. He spoke in that
embroidered court uniform, knee breeches, and shoes, and had stars on
disconcerted by this reception. He had just entered, wearing an
"Heavens! what a virulent attack!" replied the prince, not in the least

Scherer."
I shall be very charmed to see you tonight between 7 and 10--Annette
prospect of spending an evening with a poor invalid is not too terrible,
"If you have nothing better to do, Count (or Prince), and if the

by a scarlet-liveried footman that morning, ran as follows:
All her invitations without exception, written in French, and delivered

elite.
grippe; grippe being then a new word in St. Petersburg, used only by the
had had a cough for some days. She was, as she said, suffering from la
importance, who was the first to arrive at her reception. Anna Pavlovna
these words she greeted Prince Vasili Kuragin, a man of high rank and
Scherer, maid of honor and favorite of the Empress Marya Fedorovna. With
It was in July, 1805, and the speaker was the well-known Anna Pavlovna

you--sit down and tell me all the news."
slave,' as you call yourself! But how do you do? I see I have frightened
to do with you and you are no longer my friend, no longer my 'faithful
Antichrist--I really believe he is Antichrist--I will have nothing more
if you still try to defend the infamies and horrors perpetrated by that
Buonapartes. But I warn you, if you don't tell me that this means war,
"Well, Prince, so Genoa and Lucca are now just family estates of the

CHAPTER I




BOOK ONE: 1805

CHAPTER XII

CHAPTER XI

CHAPTER X

CHAPTER IX

CHAPTER VIII

CHAPTER VII

CHAPTER VI

CHAPTER V

CHAPTER IV

CHAPTER III

CHAPTER II

CHAPTER I

SECOND EPILOGUE

CHAPTER XVI

CHAPTER XV

CHAPTER XIV

CHAPTER XIII

CHAPTER XII

CHAPTER XI

CHAPTER X

CHAPTER IX

CHAPTER VIII

CHAPTER VII

CHAPTER VI

CHAPTER V

CHAPTER IV

CHAPTER III

CHAPTER II

CHAPTER I

FIRST EPILOGUE: 1813 - 20

CHAPTER XX

CHAPTER XIX

CHAPTER XVIII

CHAPTER XVII

CHAPTER XVI

CHAPTER XV

CHAPTER XIV

CHAPTER XIII

CHAPTER XII

CHAPTER XI

CHAPTER X

CHAPTER IX

CHAPTER VIII

CHAPTER VII

CHAPTER VI

CHAPTER V

CHAPTER IV

CHAPTER III

CHAPTER II

CHAPTER I

BOOK FIFTEEN: 1812 - 13

CHAPTER XIX

CHAPTER XVIII

CHAPTER XVII

CHAPTER XVI

CHAPTER XV

CHAPTER XIV

CHAPTER XIII

CHAPTER XII

CHAPTER XI

CHAPTER X

CHAPTER IX

CHAPTER VIII

CHAPTER VII

CHAPTER VI

CHAPTER V

CHAPTER IV

CHAPTER III

CHAPTER II

CHAPTER I

BOOK FOURTEEN: 1812

CHAPTER XIX

CHAPTER XVIII

CHAPTER XVII

CHAPTER XVI

CHAPTER XV

CHAPTER XIV

CHAPTER XIII

CHAPTER XII

CHAPTER XI

CHAPTER X

CHAPTER IX

CHAPTER VIII

CHAPTER VII

CHAPTER VI

CHAPTER V

CHAPTER IV

CHAPTER III

CHAPTER II

CHAPTER I

BOOK THIRTEEN: 1812

CHAPTER XVI

CHAPTER XV

CHAPTER XIV

CHAPTER XIII

CHAPTER XII

CHAPTER XI

CHAPTER X

CHAPTER IX

CHAPTER VIII

CHAPTER VII

CHAPTER VI

CHAPTER V

CHAPTER IV

CHAPTER III

CHAPTER II

CHAPTER I

BOOK TWELVE: 1812

CHAPTER XXXIV

CHAPTER XXXIII

CHAPTER XXXII

CHAPTER XXXI

CHAPTER XXX

CHAPTER XXIX

CHAPTER XXVIII

CHAPTER XXVII

CHAPTER XXVI

CHAPTER XXV

CHAPTER XXIV

CHAPTER XXIII

CHAPTER XXII

CHAPTER XXI

CHAPTER XX

CHAPTER XIX

CHAPTER XVIII

CHAPTER XVII

CHAPTER XVI

CHAPTER XV

CHAPTER XIV

CHAPTER XIII

CHAPTER XII

CHAPTER XI

CHAPTER X

CHAPTER IX

CHAPTER VIII

CHAPTER VII

CHAPTER VI

CHAPTER V

CHAPTER IV

CHAPTER III

CHAPTER II

CHAPTER I

BOOK ELEVEN: 1812

CHAPTER XXXIX

CHAPTER XXXVIII

CHAPTER XXXVII

CHAPTER XXXVI

CHAPTER XXXV

CHAPTER XXXIV

CHAPTER XXXIII

CHAPTER XXXII

CHAPTER XXXI

CHAPTER XXX

CHAPTER XXIX

CHAPTER XXVIII

CHAPTER XXVII

CHAPTER XXVI

CHAPTER XXV

CHAPTER XXIV

CHAPTER XXIII

CHAPTER XXII

CHAPTER XXI

CHAPTER XX

CHAPTER XIX

CHAPTER XVIII

CHAPTER XVII

CHAPTER XVI

CHAPTER XV

CHAPTER XIV

CHAPTER XIII

CHAPTER XII

CHAPTER XI

CHAPTER X

CHAPTER IX

CHAPTER VIII

CHAPTER VII

CHAPTER VI

CHAPTER V

CHAPTER IV

CHAPTER III

CHAPTER II

CHAPTER I

BOOK TEN: 1812

CHAPTER XXIII

CHAPTER XXII

CHAPTER XXI

CHAPTER XX

CHAPTER XIX

CHAPTER XVIII

CHAPTER XVII

CHAPTER XVI

CHAPTER XV

CHAPTER XIV

CHAPTER XIII

CHAPTER XII

CHAPTER XI

CHAPTER X

CHAPTER IX

CHAPTER VIII

CHAPTER VII

CHAPTER VI

CHAPTER V

CHAPTER IV

CHAPTER III

CHAPTER II

CHAPTER I

BOOK NINE: 1812

CHAPTER XXII

CHAPTER XXI

CHAPTER XX

CHAPTER XIX

CHAPTER XVIII

CHAPTER XVII

CHAPTER XVI

CHAPTER XV

CHAPTER XIV

CHAPTER XIII

CHAPTER XII

CHAPTER XI

CHAPTER X

CHAPTER IX

CHAPTER VIII

CHAPTER VII

CHAPTER VI

CHAPTER V

CHAPTER IV

CHAPTER III

CHAPTER II

CHAPTER I

BOOK EIGHT: 1811 - 12

CHAPTER XIII

CHAPTER XII

CHAPTER XI

CHAPTER X

CHAPTER IX

CHAPTER VIII

CHAPTER VII

CHAPTER VI

CHAPTER V

CHAPTER IV

CHAPTER III

CHAPTER II

CHAPTER I

BOOK SEVEN: 1810 - 11

CHAPTER XXVI

CHAPTER XXV

CHAPTER XXIV

CHAPTER XXIII

CHAPTER XXII

CHAPTER XXI

CHAPTER XX

CHAPTER XIX

CHAPTER XVIII

CHAPTER XVII

CHAPTER XVI

CHAPTER XV

CHAPTER XIV

CHAPTER XIII

CHAPTER XII

CHAPTER XI

CHAPTER X

CHAPTER IX

CHAPTER VIII

CHAPTER VII

CHAPTER VI

CHAPTER V

CHAPTER IV

CHAPTER III

CHAPTER II

CHAPTER I

BOOK SIX: 1808 - 10

CHAPTER XXII

CHAPTER XXI

CHAPTER XX

CHAPTER XIX

CHAPTER XVIII

CHAPTER XVII

CHAPTER XVI

CHAPTER XV

CHAPTER XIV

CHAPTER XIII

CHAPTER XII

CHAPTER XI

CHAPTER X

CHAPTER IX

CHAPTER VIII

CHAPTER VII

CHAPTER VI

CHAPTER V

CHAPTER IV

CHAPTER III

CHAPTER II

CHAPTER I

BOOK FIVE: 1806 - 07

CHAPTER XVI

CHAPTER XV

CHAPTER XIV

CHAPTER XIII

CHAPTER XII

CHAPTER XI

CHAPTER X

CHAPTER IX

CHAPTER VIII

CHAPTER VII

CHAPTER VI

CHAPTER V

CHAPTER IV

CHAPTER III

CHAPTER II

CHAPTER I

BOOK FOUR: 1806

CHAPTER XIX

CHAPTER XVIII

CHAPTER XVII

CHAPTER XVI

CHAPTER XV

CHAPTER XIV

CHAPTER XIII

CHAPTER XII

CHAPTER XI

CHAPTER X

CHAPTER IX

CHAPTER VIII

CHAPTER VII

CHAPTER VI

CHAPTER V

CHAPTER IV

CHAPTER III

CHAPTER II

CHAPTER I

BOOK THREE: 1805

CHAPTER XXI

CHAPTER XX

CHAPTER XIX

CHAPTER XVIII

CHAPTER XVII

CHAPTER XVI

CHAPTER XV

CHAPTER XIV

CHAPTER XIII

CHAPTER XII

CHAPTER XI

CHAPTER X

CHAPTER IX

CHAPTER VIII

CHAPTER VII

CHAPTER VI

CHAPTER V

CHAPTER IV

CHAPTER III

CHAPTER II

CHAPTER I

BOOK TWO: 1805

CHAPTER XXVIII

CHAPTER XXVII

CHAPTER XXVI

CHAPTER XXV

CHAPTER XXIV

CHAPTER XXIII

CHAPTER XXII

CHAPTER XXI

CHAPTER XX

CHAPTER XIX

CHAPTER XVIII

CHAPTER XVII

CHAPTER XVI

CHAPTER XV

CHAPTER XIV

CHAPTER XIII

CHAPTER XII

CHAPTER XI

CHAPTER X

CHAPTER IX

CHAPTER VIII

CHAPTER VII

CHAPTER VI

CHAPTER V

CHAPTER IV

CHAPTER III

CHAPTER II

CHAPTER I

BOOK ONE: 1805

CONTENTS

By Leo Tolstoy/Tolstoi

WAR AND PEACE





An Anonymous Volunteer, and David Widger

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WAR AND PEACE ***

Character set encoding: ASCII

Language: English

Last Updated: March 15, 2013

Posting Date: January 10, 2009 [EBook #2600]

Translators: Louise and Aylmer Maude

Author: Leo Tolstoy

Title: War and Peace


eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org
under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost

The Project Gutenberg EBook of War and Peace, by Leo Tolstoy


